DRACULA




CHAPTER I

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL

(_Kept in shorthand._)


_3 May. Bistritz._--Left Munich at 8:35 P. M., on 1st May, arriving at
Vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6:46, but train was an
hour late. Buda-Pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse which I
got of it from the train and the little I could walk through the
streets. I feared to go very far from the station, as we had arrived
late and would start as near the correct time as possible. The
impression I had was that we were leaving the West and entering the
East; the most western of splendid bridges over the Danube, which is
here of noble width and depth, took us among the traditions of Turkish
rule.

We left in pretty good time, and came after nightfall to Klausenburgh.
Here I stopped for the night at the Hotel Royale. I had for dinner, or
rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which was
very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for Mina.) I asked the
waiter, and he said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was a
national dish, I should be able to get it anywhere along the
Carpathians. I found my smattering of German very useful here; indeed, I
don't know how I should be able to get on without it.

Having had some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited the
British Museum, and made search among the books and maps in the library
regarding Transylvania; it had struck me that some foreknowledge of the
country could hardly fail to have some importance in dealing with a
nobleman of that country. I find that the district he named is in the
extreme east of the country, just on the borders of three states,
Transylvania, Moldavia and Bukovina, in the midst of the Carpathian
mountains; one of the wildest and least known portions of Europe. I was
not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality of the
Castle Dracula, as there are no maps of this country as yet to compare
with our own Ordnance Survey maps; but I found that Bistritz, the post
town named by Count Dracula, is a fairly well-known place. I shall enter
here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memory when I talk over my
travels with Mina.

In the population of Transylvania there are four distinct nationalities:
Saxons in the South, and mixed with them the Wallachs, who are the
descendants of the Dacians; Magyars in the West, and Szekelys in the
East and North. I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended
from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered
the country in the eleventh century they found the Huns settled in it. I
read that every known superstition in the world is gathered into the
horseshoe of the Carpathians, as if it were the centre of some sort of
imaginative whirlpool; if so my stay may be very interesting. (_Mem._, I
must ask the Count all about them.)

I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had
all sorts of queer dreams. There was a dog howling all night under my
window, which may have had something to do with it; or it may have been
the paprika, for I had to drink up all the water in my carafe, and was
still thirsty. Towards morning I slept and was wakened by the continuous
knocking at my door, so I guess I must have been sleeping soundly then.
I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of porridge of maize flour
which they said was "mamaliga," and egg-plant stuffed with forcemeat, a
very excellent dish, which they call "impletata." (_Mem._, get recipe
for this also.) I had to hurry breakfast, for the train started a little
before eight, or rather it ought to have done so, for after rushing to
the station at 7:30 I had to sit in the carriage for more than an hour
before we began to move. It seems to me that the further east you go the
more unpunctual are the trains. What ought they to be in China?

All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of
beauty of every kind. Sometimes we saw little towns or castles on the
top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by
rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side
of them to be subject to great floods. It takes a lot of water, and
running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear. At every
station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts
of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I
saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats
and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women
looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were very clumsy
about the waist. They had all full white sleeves of some kind or other,
and most of them had big belts with a lot of strips of something
fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there
were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the
Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy
hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous
heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass
nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and
had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very
picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be
set down at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are,
however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural
self-assertion.

It was on the dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz, which is a
very interesting old place. Being practically on the frontier--for the
Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a very stormy
existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series
of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate
occasions. At the very beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent
a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war
proper being assisted by famine and disease.

Count Dracula had directed me to go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I
found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of
course I wanted to see all I could of the ways of the country. I was
evidently expected, for when I got near the door I faced a
cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress--white
undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff
fitting almost too tight for modesty. When I came close she bowed and
said, "The Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She
smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves,
who had followed her to the door. He went, but immediately returned with
a letter:--

     "My Friend.--Welcome to the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting
     you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will
     start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo
     Pass my carriage will await you and will bring you to me. I trust
     that your journey from London has been a happy one, and that you
     will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land.

"Your friend,

"DRACULA."


_4 May._--I found that my landlord had got a letter from the Count,
directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but on
making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and
pretended that he could not understand my German. This could not be
true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he
answered my questions exactly as if he did. He and his wife, the old
lady who had received me, looked at each other in a frightened sort of
way. He mumbled out that the money had been sent in a letter, and that
was all he knew. When I asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and could
tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed themselves,
and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak
further. It was so near the time of starting that I had no time to ask
any one else, for it was all very mysterious and not by any means
comforting.

Just before I was leaving, the old lady came up to my room and said in a
very hysterical way:

"Must you go? Oh! young Herr, must you go?" She was in such an excited
state that she seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and
mixed it all up with some other language which I did not know at all. I
was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told her
that I must go at once, and that I was engaged on important business,
she asked again:

"Do you know what day it is?" I answered that it was the fourth of May.
She shook her head as she said again:

"Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know what day it is?" On
my saying that I did not understand, she went on:

"It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that to-night, when
the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world will have
full sway? Do you know where you are going, and what you are going to?"
She was in such evident distress that I tried to comfort her, but
without effect. Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not
to go; at least to wait a day or two before starting. It was all very
ridiculous but I did not feel comfortable. However, there was business
to be done, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I therefore
tried to raise her up, and said, as gravely as I could, that I thanked
her, but my duty was imperative, and that I must go. She then rose and
dried her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me. I
did not know what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been
taught to regard such things as in some measure idolatrous, and yet it
seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in such a
state of mind. She saw, I suppose, the doubt in my face, for she put the
rosary round my neck, and said, "For your mother's sake," and went out
of the room. I am writing up this part of the diary whilst I am waiting
for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still
round my neck. Whether it is the old lady's fear, or the many ghostly
traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not know, but I
am not feeling nearly as easy in my mind as usual. If this book should
ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here comes the
coach!

       *       *       *       *       *

_5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the morning has passed, and the sun is
high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or
hills I know not, for it is so far off that big things and little are
mixed. I am not sleepy, and, as I am not to be called till I awake,
naturally I write till sleep comes. There are many odd things to put
down, and, lest who reads them may fancy that I dined too well before I
left Bistritz, let me put down my dinner exactly. I dined on what they
called "robber steak"--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red
pepper, and strung on sticks and roasted over the fire, in the simple
style of the London cat's meat! The wine was Golden Mediasch, which
produces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not
disagreeable. I had only a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else.

When I got on the coach the driver had not taken his seat, and I saw him
talking with the landlady. They were evidently talking of me, for every
now and then they looked at me, and some of the people who were sitting
on the bench outside the door--which they call by a name meaning
"word-bearer"--came and listened, and then looked at me, most of them
pityingly. I could hear a lot of words often repeated, queer words, for
there were many nationalities in the crowd; so I quietly got my polyglot
dictionary from my bag and looked them out. I must say they were not
cheering to me, for amongst them were "Ordog"--Satan, "pokol"--hell,
"stregoica"--witch, "vrolok" and "vlkoslak"--both of which mean the same
thing, one being Slovak and the other Servian for something that is
either were-wolf or vampire. (_Mem._, I must ask the Count about these
superstitions)

When we started, the crowd round the inn door, which had by this time
swelled to a considerable size, all made the sign of the cross and
pointed two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a
fellow-passenger to tell me what they meant; he would not answer at
first, but on learning that I was English, he explained that it was a
charm or guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me,
just starting for an unknown place to meet an unknown man; but every one
seemed so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and so sympathetic that I
could not but be touched. I shall never forget the last glimpse which I
had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing
themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of
rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in the
centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered
the whole front of the box-seat--"gotza" they call them--cracked his big
whip over his four small horses, which ran abreast, and we set off on
our journey.

I soon lost sight and recollection of ghostly fears in the beauty of the
scene as we drove along, although had I known the language, or rather
languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, I might not have
been able to throw them off so easily. Before us lay a green sloping
land full of forests and woods, with here and there steep hills, crowned
with clumps of trees or with farmhouses, the blank gable end to the
road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple,
plum, pear, cherry; and as we drove by I could see the green grass under
the trees spangled with the fallen petals. In and out amongst these
green hills of what they call here the "Mittel Land" ran the road,
losing itself as it swept round the grassy curve, or was shut out by the
straggling ends of pine woods, which here and there ran down the
hillsides like tongues of flame. The road was rugged, but still we
seemed to fly over it with a feverish haste. I could not understand then
what the haste meant, but the driver was evidently bent on losing no
time in reaching Borgo Prund. I was told that this road is in summertime
excellent, but that it had not yet been put in order after the winter
snows. In this respect it is different from the general run of roads in
the Carpathians, for it is an old tradition that they are not to be kept
in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the
Turk should think that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops,
and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point.

Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes
of forest up to the lofty steeps of the Carpathians themselves. Right
and left of us they towered, with the afternoon sun falling full upon
them and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range,
deep blue and purple in the shadows of the peaks, green and brown where
grass and rock mingled, and an endless perspective of jagged rock and
pointed crags, till these were themselves lost in the distance, where
the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the
mountains, through which, as the sun began to sink, we saw now and again
the white gleam of falling water. One of my companions touched my arm as
we swept round the base of a hill and opened up the lofty, snow-covered
peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on our serpentine way, to
be right before us:--

"Look! Isten szek!"--"God's seat!"--and he crossed himself reverently.

As we wound on our endless way, and the sun sank lower and lower behind
us, the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. This was
emphasised by the fact that the snowy mountain-top still held the
sunset, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink. Here and there
we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed
that goitre was painfully prevalent. By the roadside were many crosses,
and as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there
was a peasant man or woman kneeling before a shrine, who did not even
turn round as we approached, but seemed in the self-surrender of
devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There were
many things new to me: for instance, hay-ricks in the trees, and here
and there very beautiful masses of weeping birch, their white stems
shining like silver through the delicate green of the leaves. Now and
again we passed a leiter-wagon--the ordinary peasant's cart--with its
long, snake-like vertebra, calculated to suit the inequalities of the
road. On this were sure to be seated quite a group of home-coming
peasants, the Cszeks with their white, and the Slovaks with their
coloured, sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long
staves, with axe at end. As the evening fell it began to get very cold,
and the growing twilight seemed to merge into one dark mistiness the
gloom of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valleys which
ran deep between the spurs of the hills, as we ascended through the
Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there against the background of
late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the pine woods
that seemed in the darkness to be closing down upon us, great masses of
greyness, which here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a
peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and
grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the falling sunset
threw into strange relief the ghost-like clouds which amongst the
Carpathians seem to wind ceaselessly through the valleys. Sometimes the
hills were so steep that, despite our driver's haste, the horses could
only go slowly. I wished to get down and walk up them, as we do at home,
but the driver would not hear of it. "No, no," he said; "you must not
walk here; the dogs are too fierce"; and then he added, with what he
evidently meant for grim pleasantry--for he looked round to catch the
approving smile of the rest--"and you may have enough of such matters
before you go to sleep." The only stop he would make was a moment's
pause to light his lamps.

When it grew dark there seemed to be some excitement amongst the
passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as
though urging him to further speed. He lashed the horses unmercifully
with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on
to further exertions. Then through the darkness I could see a sort of
patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a cleft in the
hills. The excitement of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach
rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a
stormy sea. I had to hold on. The road grew more level, and we appeared
to fly along. Then the mountains seemed to come nearer to us on each
side and to frown down upon us; we were entering on the Borgo Pass. One
by one several of the passengers offered me gifts, which they pressed
upon me with an earnestness which would take no denial; these were
certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good
faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of
fear-meaning movements which I had seen outside the hotel at
Bistritz--the sign of the cross and the guard against the evil eye.
Then, as we flew along, the driver leaned forward, and on each side the
passengers, craning over the edge of the coach, peered eagerly into the
darkness. It was evident that something very exciting was either
happening or expected, but though I asked each passenger, no one would
give me the slightest explanation. This state of excitement kept on for
some little time; and at last we saw before us the Pass opening out on
the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the
air the heavy, oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as though the
mountain range had separated two atmospheres, and that now we had got
into the thunderous one. I was now myself looking out for the conveyance
which was to take me to the Count. Each moment I expected to see the
glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was dark. The only light
was the flickering rays of our own lamps, in which the steam from our
hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud. We could see now the sandy
road lying white before us, but there was on it no sign of a vehicle.
The passengers drew back with a sigh of gladness, which seemed to mock
my own disappointment. I was already thinking what I had best do, when
the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which I
could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I
thought it was "An hour less than the time." Then turning to me, he said
in German worse than my own:--

"There is no carriage here. The Herr is not expected after all. He will
now come on to Bukovina, and return to-morrow or the next day; better
the next day." Whilst he was speaking the horses began to neigh and
snort and plunge wildly, so that the driver had to hold them up. Then,
amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal crossing
of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook
us, and drew up beside the coach. I could see from the flash of our
lamps, as the rays fell on them, that the horses were coal-black and
splendid animals. They were driven by a tall man, with a long brown
beard and a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face from us. I
could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red
in the lamplight, as he turned to us. He said to the driver:--

"You are early to-night, my friend." The man stammered in reply:--

"The English Herr was in a hurry," to which the stranger replied:--

"That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to Bukovina. You cannot
deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and my horses are swift." As he
spoke he smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, with
very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory. One of my
companions whispered to another the line from Burger's "Lenore":--

    "Denn die Todten reiten schnell"--
    ("For the dead travel fast.")

The strange driver evidently heard the words, for he looked up with a
gleaming smile. The passenger turned his face away, at the same time
putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. "Give me the Herr's
luggage," said the driver; and with exceeding alacrity my bags were
handed out and put in the calèche. Then I descended from the side of the
coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a
hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel; his strength must have been
prodigious. Without a word he shook his reins, the horses turned, and we
swept into the darkness of the Pass. As I looked back I saw the steam
from the horses of the coach by the light of the lamps, and projected
against it the figures of my late companions crossing themselves. Then
the driver cracked his whip and called to his horses, and off they swept
on their way to Bukovina. As they sank into the darkness I felt a
strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me; but a cloak was thrown
over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the driver said in
excellent German:--

"The night is chill, mein Herr, and my master the Count bade me take all
care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the
country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not take
any, but it was a comfort to know it was there all the same. I felt a
little strangely, and not a little frightened. I think had there been
any alternative I should have taken it, instead of prosecuting that
unknown night journey. The carriage went at a hard pace straight along,
then we made a complete turn and went along another straight road. It
seemed to me that we were simply going over and over the same ground
again; and so I took note of some salient point, and found that this was
so. I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but
I really feared to do so, for I thought that, placed as I was, any
protest would have had no effect in case there had been an intention to
delay. By-and-by, however, as I was curious to know how time was
passing, I struck a match, and by its flame looked at my watch; it was
within a few minutes of midnight. This gave me a sort of shock, for I
suppose the general superstition about midnight was increased by my
recent experiences. I waited with a sick feeling of suspense.

Then a dog began to howl somewhere in a farmhouse far down the road--a
long, agonised wailing, as if from fear. The sound was taken up by
another dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which
now sighed softly through the Pass, a wild howling began, which seemed
to come from all over the country, as far as the imagination could grasp
it through the gloom of the night. At the first howl the horses began to
strain and rear, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they
quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from
sudden fright. Then, far off in the distance, from the mountains on each
side of us began a louder and a sharper howling--that of wolves--which
affected both the horses and myself in the same way--for I was minded to
jump from the calèche and run, whilst they reared again and plunged
madly, so that the driver had to use all his great strength to keep them
from bolting. In a few minutes, however, my own ears got accustomed to
the sound, and the horses so far became quiet that the driver was able
to descend and to stand before them. He petted and soothed them, and
whispered something in their ears, as I have heard of horse-tamers
doing, and with extraordinary effect, for under his caresses they became
quite manageable again, though they still trembled. The driver again
took his seat, and shaking his reins, started off at a great pace. This
time, after going to the far side of the Pass, he suddenly turned down a
narrow roadway which ran sharply to the right.

Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over the
roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great frowning
rocks guarded us boldly on either side. Though we were in shelter, we
could hear the rising wind, for it moaned and whistled through the
rocks, and the branches of the trees crashed together as we swept along.
It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall,
so that soon we and all around us were covered with a white blanket. The
keen wind still carried the howling of the dogs, though this grew
fainter as we went on our way. The baying of the wolves sounded nearer
and nearer, as though they were closing round on us from every side. I
grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my fear. The driver,
however, was not in the least disturbed; he kept turning his head to
left and right, but I could not see anything through the darkness.

Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a faint flickering blue flame. The
driver saw it at the same moment; he at once checked the horses, and,
jumping to the ground, disappeared into the darkness. I did not know
what to do, the less as the howling of the wolves grew closer; but while
I wondered the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a word took
his seat, and we resumed our journey. I think I must have fallen asleep
and kept dreaming of the incident, for it seemed to be repeated
endlessly, and now looking back, it is like a sort of awful nightmare.
Once the flame appeared so near the road, that even in the darkness
around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where
the blue flame arose--it must have been very faint, for it did not seem
to illumine the place around it at all--and gathering a few stones,
formed them into some device. Once there appeared a strange optical
effect: when he stood between me and the flame he did not obstruct it,
for I could see its ghostly flicker all the same. This startled me, but
as the effect was only momentary, I took it that my eyes deceived me
straining through the darkness. Then for a time there were no blue
flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the
wolves around us, as though they were following in a moving circle.

At last there came a time when the driver went further afield than he
had yet gone, and during his absence, the horses began to tremble worse
than ever and to snort and scream with fright. I could not see any cause
for it, for the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether; but just
then the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared behind the
jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its light I saw
around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues,
with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hundred times more
terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled.
For myself, I felt a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only when a man
feels himself face to face with such horrors that he can understand
their true import.

All at once the wolves began to howl as though the moonlight had had
some peculiar effect on them. The horses jumped about and reared, and
looked helplessly round with eyes that rolled in a way painful to see;
but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they
had perforce to remain within it. I called to the coachman to come, for
it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out through the
ring and to aid his approach. I shouted and beat the side of the
calèche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from that side, so as
to give him a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know
not, but I heard his voice raised in a tone of imperious command, and
looking towards the sound, saw him stand in the roadway. As he swept his
long arms, as though brushing aside some impalpable obstacle, the wolves
fell back and back further still. Just then a heavy cloud passed across
the face of the moon, so that we were again in darkness.

When I could see again the driver was climbing into the calèche, and the
wolves had disappeared. This was all so strange and uncanny that a
dreadful fear came upon me, and I was afraid to speak or move. The time
seemed interminable as we swept on our way, now in almost complete
darkness, for the rolling clouds obscured the moon. We kept on
ascending, with occasional periods of quick descent, but in the main
always ascending. Suddenly, I became conscious of the fact that the
driver was in the act of pulling up the horses in the courtyard of a
vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light,
and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit
sky.




CHAPTER II

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_


_5 May._--I must have been asleep, for certainly if I had been fully
awake I must have noticed the approach of such a remarkable place. In
the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark
ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than
it really is. I have not yet been able to see it by daylight.

When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and held out his hand
to assist me to alight. Again I could not but notice his prodigious
strength. His hand actually seemed like a steel vice that could have
crushed mine if he had chosen. Then he took out my traps, and placed
them on the ground beside me as I stood close to a great door, old and
studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of
massive stone. I could see even in the dim light that the stone was
massively carved, but that the carving had been much worn by time and
weather. As I stood, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook the
reins; the horses started forward, and trap and all disappeared down one
of the dark openings.

I stood in silence where I was, for I did not know what to do. Of bell
or knocker there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark
window openings it was not likely that my voice could penetrate. The
time I waited seemed endless, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon
me. What sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of people?
What sort of grim adventure was it on which I had embarked? Was this a
customary incident in the life of a solicitor's clerk sent out to
explain the purchase of a London estate to a foreigner? Solicitor's
clerk! Mina would not like that. Solicitor--for just before leaving
London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am now a
full-blown solicitor! I began to rub my eyes and pinch myself to see if
I were awake. It all seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and I
expected that I should suddenly awake, and find myself at home, with
the dawn struggling in through the windows, as I had now and again felt
in the morning after a day of overwork. But my flesh answered the
pinching test, and my eyes were not to be deceived. I was indeed awake
and among the Carpathians. All I could do now was to be patient, and to
wait the coming of the morning.

Just as I had come to this conclusion I heard a heavy step approaching
behind the great door, and saw through the chinks the gleam of a coming
light. Then there was the sound of rattling chains and the clanking of
massive bolts drawn back. A key was turned with the loud grating noise
of long disuse, and the great door swung back.

Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a long white
moustache, and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck
of colour about him anywhere. He held in his hand an antique silver
lamp, in which the flame burned without chimney or globe of any kind,
throwing long quivering shadows as it flickered in the draught of the
open door. The old man motioned me in with his right hand with a courtly
gesture, saying in excellent English, but with a strange intonation:--

"Welcome to my house! Enter freely and of your own will!" He made no
motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his
gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that
I had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and
holding out his hand grasped mine with a strength which made me wince,
an effect which was not lessened by the fact that it seemed as cold as
ice--more like the hand of a dead than a living man. Again he said:--

"Welcome to my house. Come freely. Go safely; and leave something of the
happiness you bring!" The strength of the handshake was so much akin to
that which I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not seen, that
for a moment I doubted if it were not the same person to whom I was
speaking; so to make sure, I said interrogatively:--

"Count Dracula?" He bowed in a courtly way as he replied:--

"I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in;
the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest." As he was
speaking, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out,
took my luggage; he had carried it in before I could forestall him. I
protested but he insisted:--

"Nay, sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my people are not
available. Let me see to your comfort myself." He insisted on carrying
my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and
along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang
heavily. At the end of this he threw open a heavy door, and I rejoiced
to see within a well-lit room in which a table was spread for supper,
and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished,
flamed and flared.

The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and crossing
the room, opened another door, which led into a small octagonal room lit
by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing
through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to enter. It was a
welcome sight; for here was a great bedroom well lighted and warmed with
another log fire,--also added to but lately, for the top logs were
fresh--which sent a hollow roar up the wide chimney. The Count himself
left my luggage inside and withdrew, saying, before he closed the
door:--

"You will need, after your journey, to refresh yourself by making your
toilet. I trust you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come
into the other room, where you will find your supper prepared."

The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have
dissipated all my doubts and fears. Having then reached my normal state,
I discovered that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty
toilet, I went into the other room.

I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the
great fireplace, leaning against the stonework, made a graceful wave of
his hand to the table, and said:--

"I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I trust, excuse
me that I do not join you; but I have dined already, and I do not sup."

I handed to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to me.
He opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed
it to me to read. One passage of it, at least, gave me a thrill of
pleasure.

"I must regret that an attack of gout, from which malady I am a constant
sufferer, forbids absolutely any travelling on my part for some time to
come; but I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in
whom I have every possible confidence. He is a young man, full of energy
and talent in his own way, and of a very faithful disposition. He is
discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my service. He shall
be ready to attend on you when you will during his stay, and shall take
your instructions in all matters."

The Count himself came forward and took off the cover of a dish, and I
fell to at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese
and a salad and a bottle of old Tokay, of which I had two glasses, was
my supper. During the time I was eating it the Count asked me many
questions as to my journey, and I told him by degrees all I had
experienced.

By this time I had finished my supper, and by my host's desire had drawn
up a chair by the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me,
at the same time excusing himself that he did not smoke. I had now an
opportunity of observing him, and found him of a very marked
physiognomy.

His face was a strong--a very strong--aquiline, with high bridge of the
thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils; with lofty domed forehead, and
hair growing scantily round the temples but profusely elsewhere. His
eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with bushy
hair that seemed to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so far as I
could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather
cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; these protruded over
the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in a
man of his years. For the rest, his ears were pale, and at the tops
extremely pointed; the chin was broad and strong, and the cheeks firm
though thin. The general effect was one of extraordinary pallor.

Hitherto I had noticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees
in the firelight, and they had seemed rather white and fine; but seeing
them now close to me, I could not but notice that they were rather
coarse--broad, with squat fingers. Strange to say, there were hairs in
the centre of the palm. The nails were long and fine, and cut to a sharp
point. As the Count leaned over me and his hands touched me, I could not
repress a shudder. It may have been that his breath was rank, but a
horrible feeling of nausea came over me, which, do what I would, I could
not conceal. The Count, evidently noticing it, drew back; and with a
grim sort of smile, which showed more than he had yet done his
protuberant teeth, sat himself down again on his own side of the
fireplace. We were both silent for a while; and as I looked towards the
window I saw the first dim streak of the coming dawn. There seemed a
strange stillness over everything; but as I listened I heard as if from
down below in the valley the howling of many wolves. The Count's eyes
gleamed, and he said:--

"Listen to them--the children of the night. What music they make!"
Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face strange to him, he
added:--

"Ah, sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the feelings of the
hunter." Then he rose and said:--

"But you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you
shall sleep as late as you will. I have to be away till the afternoon;
so sleep well and dream well!" With a courteous bow, he opened for me
himself the door to the octagonal room, and I entered my bedroom....

I am all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things,
which I dare not confess to my own soul. God keep me, if only for the
sake of those dear to me!

       *       *       *       *       *

_7 May._--It is again early morning, but I have rested and enjoyed the
last twenty-four hours. I slept till late in the day, and awoke of my
own accord. When I had dressed myself I went into the room where we had
supped, and found a cold breakfast laid out, with coffee kept hot by the
pot being placed on the hearth. There was a card on the table, on which
was written:--

"I have to be absent for a while. Do not wait for me.--D." I set to and
enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had done, I looked for a bell, so that I
might let the servants know I had finished; but I could not find one.
There are certainly odd deficiencies in the house, considering the
extraordinary evidences of wealth which are round me. The table service
is of gold, and so beautifully wrought that it must be of immense value.
The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of
my bed are of the costliest and most beautiful fabrics, and must have
been of fabulous value when they were made, for they are centuries old,
though in excellent order. I saw something like them in Hampton Court,
but there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of
the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my
table, and I had to get the little shaving glass from my bag before I
could either shave or brush my hair. I have not yet seen a servant
anywhere, or heard a sound near the castle except the howling of wolves.
Some time after I had finished my meal--I do not know whether to call it
breakfast or dinner, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had
it--I looked about for something to read, for I did not like to go about
the castle until I had asked the Count's permission. There was
absolutely nothing in the room, book, newspaper, or even writing
materials; so I opened another door in the room and found a sort of
library. The door opposite mine I tried, but found it locked.

In the library I found, to my great delight, a vast number of English
books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and
newspapers. A table in the centre was littered with English magazines
and newspapers, though none of them were of very recent date. The books
were of the most varied kind--history, geography, politics, political
economy, botany, geology, law--all relating to England and English life
and customs and manners. There were even such books of reference as the
London Directory, the "Red" and "Blue" books, Whitaker's Almanac, the
Army and Navy Lists, and--it somehow gladdened my heart to see it--the
Law List.

Whilst I was looking at the books, the door opened, and the Count
entered. He saluted me in a hearty way, and hoped that I had had a good
night's rest. Then he went on:--

"I am glad you found your way in here, for I am sure there is much that
will interest you. These companions"--and he laid his hand on some of
the books--"have been good friends to me, and for some years past, ever
since I had the idea of going to London, have given me many, many hours
of pleasure. Through them I have come to know your great England; and to
know her is to love her. I long to go through the crowded streets of
your mighty London, to be in the midst of the whirl and rush of
humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that makes
it what it is. But alas! as yet I only know your tongue through books.
To you, my friend, I look that I know it to speak."

"But, Count," I said, "you know and speak English thoroughly!" He bowed
gravely.

"I thank you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I
fear that I am but a little way on the road I would travel. True, I know
the grammar and the words, but yet I know not how to speak them."

"Indeed," I said, "you speak excellently."

"Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, did I move and speak in your
London, none there are who would not know me for a stranger. That is not
enough for me. Here I am noble; I am _boyar_; the common people know me,
and I am master. But a stranger in a strange land, he is no one; men
know him not--and to know not is to care not for. I am content if I am
like the rest, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his
speaking if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been so long
master that I would be master still--or at least that none other should
be master of me. You come to me not alone as agent of my friend Peter
Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me all about my new estate in London. You
shall, I trust, rest here with me awhile, so that by our talking I may
learn the English intonation; and I would that you tell me when I make
error, even of the smallest, in my speaking. I am sorry that I had to be
away so long to-day; but you will, I know, forgive one who has so many
important affairs in hand."

Of course I said all I could about being willing, and asked if I might
come into that room when I chose. He answered: "Yes, certainly," and
added:--

"You may go anywhere you wish in the castle, except where the doors are
locked, where of course you will not wish to go. There is reason that
all things are as they are, and did you see with my eyes and know with
my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand." I said I was sure of
this, and then he went on:--

"We are in Transylvania; and Transylvania is not England. Our ways are
not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from
what you have told me of your experiences already, you know something of
what strange things there may be."

This led to much conversation; and as it was evident that he wanted to
talk, if only for talking's sake, I asked him many questions regarding
things that had already happened to me or come within my notice.
Sometimes he sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation by
pretending not to understand; but generally he answered all I asked most
frankly. Then as time went on, and I had got somewhat bolder, I asked
him of some of the strange things of the preceding night, as, for
instance, why the coachman went to the places where he had seen the blue
flames. He then explained to me that it was commonly believed that on a
certain night of the year--last night, in fact, when all evil spirits
are supposed to have unchecked sway--a blue flame is seen over any place
where treasure has been concealed. "That treasure has been hidden," he
went on, "in the region through which you came last night, there can be
but little doubt; for it was the ground fought over for centuries by the
Wallachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly a foot of soil
in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood of men,
patriots or invaders. In old days there were stirring times, when the
Austrian and the Hungarian came up in hordes, and the patriots went out
to meet them--men and women, the aged and the children too--and waited
their coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might sweep
destruction on them with their artificial avalanches. When the invader
was triumphant he found but little, for whatever there was had been
sheltered in the friendly soil."

"But how," said I, "can it have remained so long undiscovered, when
there is a sure index to it if men will but take the trouble to look?"
The Count smiled, and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long,
sharp, canine teeth showed out strangely; he answered:--

"Because your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool! Those flames only
appear on one night; and on that night no man of this land will, if he
can help it, stir without his doors. And, dear sir, even if he did he
would not know what to do. Why, even the peasant that you tell me of who
marked the place of the flame would not know where to look in daylight
even for his own work. Even you would not, I dare be sworn, be able to
find these places again?"

"There you are right," I said. "I know no more than the dead where even
to look for them." Then we drifted into other matters.

"Come," he said at last, "tell me of London and of the house which you
have procured for me." With an apology for my remissness, I went into my
own room to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was placing them in
order I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room, and as I
passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp
lit, for it was by this time deep into the dark. The lamps were also lit
in the study or library, and I found the Count lying on the sofa,
reading, of all things in the world, an English Bradshaw's Guide. When I
came in he cleared the books and papers from the table; and with him I
went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts. He was interested in
everything, and asked me a myriad questions about the place and its
surroundings. He clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on the
subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end knew very much
more than I did. When I remarked this, he answered:--

"Well, but, my friend, is it not needful that I should? When I go there
I shall be all alone, and my friend Harker Jonathan--nay, pardon me, I
fall into my country's habit of putting your patronymic first--my friend
Jonathan Harker will not be by my side to correct and aid me. He will be
in Exeter, miles away, probably working at papers of the law with my
other friend, Peter Hawkins. So!"

We went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the estate at
Purfleet. When I had told him the facts and got his signature to the
necessary papers, and had written a letter with them ready to post to
Mr. Hawkins, he began to ask me how I had come across so suitable a
place. I read to him the notes which I had made at the time, and which I
inscribe here:--

"At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to
be required, and where was displayed a dilapidated notice that the place
was for sale. It is surrounded by a high wall, of ancient structure,
built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a large number of
years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with
rust.

"The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old _Quatre
Face_, as the house is four-sided, agreeing with the cardinal points of
the compass. It contains in all some twenty acres, quite surrounded by
the solid stone wall above mentioned. There are many trees on it, which
make it in places gloomy, and there is a deep, dark-looking pond or
small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear and
flows away in a fair-sized stream. The house is very large and of all
periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone
immensely thick, with only a few windows high up and heavily barred with
iron. It looks like part of a keep, and is close to an old chapel or
church. I could not enter it, as I had not the key of the door leading
to it from the house, but I have taken with my kodak views of it from
various points. The house has been added to, but in a very straggling
way, and I can only guess at the amount of ground it covers, which must
be very great. There are but few houses close at hand, one being a very
large house only recently added to and formed into a private lunatic
asylum. It is not, however, visible from the grounds."

When I had finished, he said:--

"I am glad that it is old and big. I myself am of an old family, and to
live in a new house would kill me. A house cannot be made habitable in a
day; and, after all, how few days go to make up a century. I rejoice
also that there is a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles love
not to think that our bones may lie amongst the common dead. I seek not
gaiety nor mirth, not the bright voluptuousness of much sunshine and
sparkling waters which please the young and gay. I am no longer young;
and my heart, through weary years of mourning over the dead, is not
attuned to mirth. Moreover, the walls of my castle are broken; the
shadows are many, and the wind breathes cold through the broken
battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would
be alone with my thoughts when I may." Somehow his words and his look
did not seem to accord, or else it was that his cast of face made his
smile look malignant and saturnine.

Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my papers
together. He was some little time away, and I began to look at some of
the books around me. One was an atlas, which I found opened naturally at
England, as if that map had been much used. On looking at it I found in
certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I noticed
that one was near London on the east side, manifestly where his new
estate was situated; the other two were Exeter, and Whitby on the
Yorkshire coast.

It was the better part of an hour when the Count returned. "Aha!" he
said; "still at your books? Good! But you must not work always. Come; I
am informed that your supper is ready." He took my arm, and we went into
the next room, where I found an excellent supper ready on the table. The
Count again excused himself, as he had dined out on his being away from
home. But he sat as on the previous night, and chatted whilst I ate.
After supper I smoked, as on the last evening, and the Count stayed with
me, chatting and asking questions on every conceivable subject, hour
after hour. I felt that it was getting very late indeed, but I did not
say anything, for I felt under obligation to meet my host's wishes in
every way. I was not sleepy, as the long sleep yesterday had fortified
me; but I could not help experiencing that chill which comes over one at
the coming of the dawn, which is like, in its way, the turn of the tide.
They say that people who are near death die generally at the change to
the dawn or at the turn of the tide; any one who has when tired, and
tied as it were to his post, experienced this change in the atmosphere
can well believe it. All at once we heard the crow of a cock coming up
with preternatural shrillness through the clear morning air; Count
Dracula, jumping to his feet, said:--

"Why, there is the morning again! How remiss I am to let you stay up so
long. You must make your conversation regarding my dear new country of
England less interesting, so that I may not forget how time flies by
us," and, with a courtly bow, he quickly left me.

I went into my own room and drew the curtains, but there was little to
notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all I could see was the
warm grey of quickening sky. So I pulled the curtains again, and have
written of this day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_8 May._--I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was getting too
diffuse; but now I am glad that I went into detail from the first, for
there is something so strange about this place and all in it that I
cannot but feel uneasy. I wish I were safe out of it, or that I had
never come. It may be that this strange night-existence is telling on
me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to I
could bear it, but there is no one. I have only the Count to speak with,
and he!--I fear I am myself the only living soul within the place. Let
me be prosaic so far as facts can be; it will help me to bear up, and
imagination must not run riot with me. If it does I am lost. Let me say
at once how I stand--or seem to.

I only slept a few hours when I went to bed, and feeling that I could
not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window,
and was just beginning to shave. Suddenly I felt a hand on my shoulder,
and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for
it amazed me that I had not seen him, since the reflection of the glass
covered the whole room behind me. In starting I had cut myself slightly,
but did not notice it at the moment. Having answered the Count's
salutation, I turned to the glass again to see how I had been mistaken.
This time there could be no error, for the man was close to me, and I
could see him over my shoulder. But there was no reflection of him in
the mirror! The whole room behind me was displayed; but there was no
sign of a man in it, except myself. This was startling, and, coming on
the top of so many strange things, was beginning to increase that vague
feeling of uneasiness which I always have when the Count is near; but at
the instant I saw that the cut had bled a little, and the blood was
trickling over my chin. I laid down the razor, turning as I did so half
round to look for some sticking plaster. When the Count saw my face, his
eyes blazed with a sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly made a grab at
my throat. I drew away, and his hand touched the string of beads which
held the crucifix. It made an instant change in him, for the fury passed
so quickly that I could hardly believe that it was ever there.

"Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. It is more
dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving
glass, he went on: "And this is the wretched thing that has done the
mischief. It is a foul bauble of man's vanity. Away with it!" and
opening the heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung
out the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones
of the courtyard far below. Then he withdrew without a word. It is very
annoying, for I do not see how I am to shave, unless in my watch-case or
the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal.

When I went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could
not find the Count anywhere. So I breakfasted alone. It is strange that
as yet I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be a very
peculiar man! After breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle. I
went out on the stairs, and found a room looking towards the South. The
view was magnificent, and from where I stood there was every opportunity
of seeing it. The castle is on the very edge of a terrible precipice. A
stone falling from the window would fall a thousand feet without
touching anything! As far as the eye can reach is a sea of green tree
tops, with occasionally a deep rift where there is a chasm. Here and
there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through
the forests.

But I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I had seen the view I
explored further; doors, doors, doors everywhere, and all locked and
bolted. In no place save from the windows in the castle walls is there
an available exit.

The castle is a veritable prison, and I am a prisoner!




CHAPTER III

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_


When I found that I was a prisoner a sort of wild feeling came over me.
I rushed up and down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of
every window I could find; but after a little the conviction of my
helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a
few hours I think I must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much
as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to me
that I was helpless I sat down quietly--as quietly as I have ever done
anything in my life--and began to think over what was best to be done. I
am thinking still, and as yet have come to no definite conclusion. Of
one thing only am I certain; that it is no use making my ideas known to
the Count. He knows well that I am imprisoned; and as he has done it
himself, and has doubtless his own motives for it, he would only deceive
me if I trusted him fully with the facts. So far as I can see, my only
plan will be to keep my knowledge and my fears to myself, and my eyes
open. I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own fears,
or else I am in desperate straits; and if the latter be so, I need, and
shall need, all my brains to get through.

I had hardly come to this conclusion when I heard the great door below
shut, and knew that the Count had returned. He did not come at once into
the library, so I went cautiously to my own room and found him making
the bed. This was odd, but only confirmed what I had all along
thought--that there were no servants in the house. When later I saw him
through the chink of the hinges of the door laying the table in the
dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he does himself all these
menial offices, surely it is proof that there is no one else to do them.
This gave me a fright, for if there is no one else in the castle, it
must have been the Count himself who was the driver of the coach that
brought me here. This is a terrible thought; for if so, what does it
mean that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his
hand in silence. How was it that all the people at Bistritz and on the
coach had some terrible fear for me? What meant the giving of the
crucifix, of the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless
that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is a
comfort and a strength to me whenever I touch it. It is odd that a thing
which I have been taught to regard with disfavour and as idolatrous
should in a time of loneliness and trouble be of help. Is it that there
is something in the essence of the thing itself, or that it is a medium,
a tangible help, in conveying memories of sympathy and comfort? Some
time, if it may be, I must examine this matter and try to make up my
mind about it. In the meantime I must find out all I can about Count
Dracula, as it may help me to understand. To-night he may talk of
himself, if I turn the conversation that way. I must be very careful,
however, not to awake his suspicion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Midnight._--I have had a long talk with the Count. I asked him a few
questions on Transylvania history, and he warmed up to the subject
wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especially of
battles, he spoke as if he had been present at them all. This he
afterwards explained by saying that to a _boyar_ the pride of his house
and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their
fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house he always said "we,"
and spoke almost in the plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could put
down all he said exactly as he said it, for to me it was most
fascinating. It seemed to have in it a whole history of the country. He
grew excited as he spoke, and walked about the room pulling his great
white moustache and grasping anything on which he laid his hands as
though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I
shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of
his race:--

"We Szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood
of many brave races who fought as the lion fights, for lordship. Here,
in the whirlpool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from
Iceland the fighting spirit which Thor and Wodin gave them, which their
Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe, ay,
and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the
were-wolves themselves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found
the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame,
till the dying peoples held that in their veins ran the blood of those
old witches, who, expelled from Scythia had mated with the devils in the
desert. Fools, fools! What devil or what witch was ever so great as
Attila, whose blood is in these veins?" He held up his arms. "Is it a
wonder that we were a conquering race; that we were proud; that when the
Magyar, the Lombard, the Avar, the Bulgar, or the Turk poured his
thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that when
Arpad and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland he found us
here when he reached the frontier; that the Honfoglalas was completed
there? And when the Hungarian flood swept eastward, the Szekelys were
claimed as kindred by the victorious Magyars, and to us for centuries
was trusted the guarding of the frontier of Turkey-land; ay, and more
than that, endless duty of the frontier guard, for, as the Turks say,
'water sleeps, and enemy is sleepless.' Who more gladly than we
throughout the Four Nations received the 'bloody sword,' or at its
warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the King? When was
redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of Cassova, when the
flags of the Wallach and the Magyar went down beneath the Crescent? Who
was it but one of my own race who as Voivode crossed the Danube and beat
the Turk on his own ground? This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that
his own unworthy brother, when he had fallen, sold his people to the
Turk and brought the shame of slavery on them! Was it not this Dracula,
indeed, who inspired that other of his race who in a later age again and
again brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who,
when he was beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had
to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being
slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph! They
said that he thought only of himself. Bah! what good are peasants
without a leader? Where ends the war without a brain and heart to
conduct it? Again, when, after the battle of Mohács, we threw off the
Hungarian yoke, we of the Dracula blood were amongst their leaders, for
our spirit would not brook that we were not free. Ah, young sir, the
Szekelys--and the Dracula as their heart's blood, their brains, and
their swords--can boast a record that mushroom growths like the
Hapsburgs and the Romanoffs can never reach. The warlike days are over.
Blood is too precious a thing in these days of dishonourable peace; and
the glories of the great races are as a tale that is told."

It was by this time close on morning, and we went to bed. (_Mem._, this
diary seems horribly like the beginning of the "Arabian Nights," for
everything has to break off at cockcrow--or like the ghost of Hamlet's
father.)

       *       *       *       *       *

_12 May._--Let me begin with facts--bare, meagre facts, verified by
books and figures, and of which there can be no doubt. I must not
confuse them with experiences which will have to rest on my own
observation, or my memory of them. Last evening when the Count came from
his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the
doing of certain kinds of business. I had spent the day wearily over
books, and, simply to keep my mind occupied, went over some of the
matters I had been examined in at Lincoln's Inn. There was a certain
method in the Count's inquiries, so I shall try to put them down in
sequence; the knowledge may somehow or some time be useful to me.

First, he asked if a man in England might have two solicitors or more. I
told him he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not be
wise to have more than one solicitor engaged in one transaction, as only
one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate
against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to
ask if there would be any practical difficulty in having one man to
attend, say, to banking, and another to look after shipping, in case
local help were needed in a place far from the home of the banking
solicitor. I asked him to explain more fully, so that I might not by any
chance mislead him, so he said:--

"I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under
the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from
London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now
here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strange that I have
sought the services of one so far off from London instead of some one
resident there, that my motive was that no local interest might be
served save my wish only; and as one of London residence might, perhaps,
have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, I went thus afield to
seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my interest. Now, suppose
I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to Newcastle, or
Durham, or Harwich, or Dover, might it not be that it could with more
ease be done by consigning to one in these ports?" I answered that
certainly it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of
agency one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on
instruction from any solicitor, so that the client, simply placing
himself in the hands of one man, could have his wishes carried out by
him without further trouble.

"But," said he, "I could be at liberty to direct myself. Is it not so?"

"Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who
do not like the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person."

"Good!" he said, and then went on to ask about the means of making
consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all sorts of
difficulties which might arise, but by forethought could be guarded
against. I explained all these things to him to the best of my ability,
and he certainly left me under the impression that he would have made a
wonderful solicitor, for there was nothing that he did not think of or
foresee. For a man who was never in the country, and who did not
evidently do much in the way of business, his knowledge and acumen were
wonderful. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which he had
spoken, and I had verified all as well as I could by the books
available, he suddenly stood up and said:--

"Have you written since your first letter to our friend Mr. Peter
Hawkins, or to any other?" It was with some bitterness in my heart that
I answered that I had not, that as yet I had not seen any opportunity of
sending letters to anybody.

"Then write now, my young friend," he said, laying a heavy hand on my
shoulder: "write to our friend and to any other; and say, if it will
please you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now."

"Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for my heart grew cold at the
thought.

"I desire it much; nay, I will take no refusal. When your master,
employer, what you will, engaged that someone should come on his behalf,
it was understood that my needs only were to be consulted. I have not
stinted. Is it not so?"

What could I do but bow acceptance? It was Mr. Hawkins's interest, not
mine, and I had to think of him, not myself; and besides, while Count
Dracula was speaking, there was that in his eyes and in his bearing
which made me remember that I was a prisoner, and that if I wished it I
could have no choice. The Count saw his victory in my bow, and his
mastery in the trouble of my face, for he began at once to use them, but
in his own smooth, resistless way:--

"I pray you, my good young friend, that you will not discourse of things
other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your
friends to know that you are well, and that you look forward to getting
home to them. Is it not so?" As he spoke he handed me three sheets of
note-paper and three envelopes. They were all of the thinnest foreign
post, and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet smile,
with the sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, I understood
as well as if he had spoken that I should be careful what I wrote, for
he would be able to read it. So I determined to write only formal notes
now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also to Mina, for
to her I could write in shorthand, which would puzzle the Count, if he
did see it. When I had written my two letters I sat quiet, reading a
book whilst the Count wrote several notes, referring as he wrote them to
some books on his table. Then he took up my two and placed them with his
own, and put by his writing materials, after which, the instant the door
had closed behind him, I leaned over and looked at the letters, which
were face down on the table. I felt no compunction in doing so, for
under the circumstances I felt that I should protect myself in every way
I could.

One of the letters was directed to Samuel F. Billington, No. 7, The
Crescent, Whitby, another to Herr Leutner, Varna; the third was to
Coutts & Co., London, and the fourth to Herren Klopstock & Billreuth,
bankers, Buda-Pesth. The second and fourth were unsealed. I was just
about to look at them when I saw the door-handle move. I sank back in my
seat, having just had time to replace the letters as they had been and
to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter in his
hand, entered the room. He took up the letters on the table and stamped
them carefully, and then turning to me, said:--

"I trust you will forgive me, but I have much work to do in private this
evening. You will, I hope, find all things as you wish." At the door he
turned, and after a moment's pause said:--

"Let me advise you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all
seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not by any
chance go to sleep in any other part of the castle. It is old, and has
many memories, and there are bad dreams for those who sleep unwisely. Be
warned! Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do, then
haste to your own chamber or to these rooms, for your rest will then be
safe. But if you be not careful in this respect, then"--He finished his
speech in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands as if he were
washing them. I quite understood; my only doubt was as to whether any
dream could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible net of gloom
and mystery which seemed closing around me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I endorse the last words written, but this time there is no
doubt in question. I shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is
not. I have placed the crucifix over the head of my bed--I imagine that
my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain.

When he left me I went to my room. After a little while, not hearing any
sound, I came out and went up the stone stair to where I could look out
towards the South. There was some sense of freedom in the vast expanse,
inaccessible though it was to me, as compared with the narrow darkness
of the courtyard. Looking out on this, I felt that I was indeed in
prison, and I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were of
the night. I am beginning to feel this nocturnal existence tell on me.
It is destroying my nerve. I start at my own shadow, and am full of all
sorts of horrible imaginings. God knows that there is ground for my
terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over the beautiful
expanse, bathed in soft yellow moonlight till it was almost as light as
day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows
in the valleys and gorges of velvety blackness. The mere beauty seemed
to cheer me; there was peace and comfort in every breath I drew. As I
leaned from the window my eye was caught by something moving a storey
below me, and somewhat to my left, where I imagined, from the order of
the rooms, that the windows of the Count's own room would look out. The
window at which I stood was tall and deep, stone-mullioned, and though
weatherworn, was still complete; but it was evidently many a day since
the case had been there. I drew back behind the stonework, and looked
carefully out.

What I saw was the Count's head coming out from the window. I did not
see the face, but I knew the man by the neck and the movement of his
back and arms. In any case I could not mistake the hands which I had had
so many opportunities of studying. I was at first interested and
somewhat amused, for it is wonderful how small a matter will interest
and amuse a man when he is a prisoner. But my very feelings changed to
repulsion and terror when I saw the whole man slowly emerge from the
window and begin to crawl down the castle wall over that dreadful abyss,
_face down_ with his cloak spreading out around him like great wings. At
first I could not believe my eyes. I thought it was some trick of the
moonlight, some weird effect of shadow; but I kept looking, and it could
be no delusion. I saw the fingers and toes grasp the corners of the
stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and by thus
using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable
speed, just as a lizard moves along a wall.

What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature is it in the
semblance of man? I feel the dread of this horrible place overpowering
me; I am in fear--in awful fear--and there is no escape for me; I am
encompassed about with terrors that I dare not think of....

       *       *       *       *       *

_15 May._--Once more have I seen the Count go out in his lizard fashion.
He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down, and a good
deal to the left. He vanished into some hole or window. When his head
had disappeared, I leaned out to try and see more, but without
avail--the distance was too great to allow a proper angle of sight. I
knew he had left the castle now, and thought to use the opportunity to
explore more than I had dared to do as yet. I went back to the room, and
taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked, as I had
expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went down the
stone stairs to the hall where I had entered originally. I found I could
pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains; but the
door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in the Count's
room; I must watch should his door be unlocked, so that I may get it and
escape. I went on to make a thorough examination of the various stairs
and passages, and to try the doors that opened from them. One or two
small rooms near the hall were open, but there was nothing to see in
them except old furniture, dusty with age and moth-eaten. At last,
however, I found one door at the top of the stairway which, though it
seemed to be locked, gave a little under pressure. I tried it harder,
and found that it was not really locked, but that the resistance came
from the fact that the hinges had fallen somewhat, and the heavy door
rested on the floor. Here was an opportunity which I might not have
again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that
I could enter. I was now in a wing of the castle further to the right
than the rooms I knew and a storey lower down. From the windows I could
see that the suite of rooms lay along to the south of the castle, the
windows of the end room looking out both west and south. On the latter
side, as well as to the former, there was a great precipice. The castle
was built on the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was
quite impregnable, and great windows were placed here where sling, or
bow, or culverin could not reach, and consequently light and comfort,
impossible to a position which had to be guarded, were secured. To the
west was a great valley, and then, rising far away, great jagged
mountain fastnesses, rising peak on peak, the sheer rock studded with
mountain ash and thorn, whose roots clung in cracks and crevices and
crannies of the stone. This was evidently the portion of the castle
occupied by the ladies in bygone days, for the furniture had more air of
comfort than any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the
yellow moonlight, flooding in through the diamond panes, enabled one to
see even colours, whilst it softened the wealth of dust which lay over
all and disguised in some measure the ravages of time and the moth. My
lamp seemed to be of little effect in the brilliant moonlight, but I was
glad to have it with me, for there was a dread loneliness in the place
which chilled my heart and made my nerves tremble. Still, it was better
than living alone in the rooms which I had come to hate from the
presence of the Count, and after trying a little to school my nerves, I
found a soft quietude come over me. Here I am, sitting at a little oak
table where in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much
thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my
diary in shorthand all that has happened since I closed it last. It is
nineteenth century up-to-date with a vengeance. And yet, unless my
senses deceive me, the old centuries had, and have, powers of their own
which mere "modernity" cannot kill.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later: the Morning of 16 May._--God preserve my sanity, for to this I
am reduced. Safety and the assurance of safety are things of the past.
Whilst I live on here there is but one thing to hope for, that I may not
go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it
is maddening to think that of all the foul things that lurk in this
hateful place the Count is the least dreadful to me; that to him alone I
can look for safety, even though this be only whilst I can serve his
purpose. Great God! merciful God! Let me be calm, for out of that way
lies madness indeed. I begin to get new lights on certain things which
have puzzled me. Up to now I never quite knew what Shakespeare meant
when he made Hamlet say:--

    "My tablets! quick, my tablets!
    'Tis meet that I put it down," etc.,

for now, feeling as though my own brain were unhinged or as if the shock
had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose.
The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me.

The Count's mysterious warning frightened me at the time; it frightens
me more now when I think of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon
me. I shall fear to doubt what he may say!

When I had written in my diary and had fortunately replaced the book and
pen in my pocket I felt sleepy. The Count's warning came into my mind,
but I took a pleasure in disobeying it. The sense of sleep was upon me,
and with it the obstinacy which sleep brings as outrider. The soft
moonlight soothed, and the wide expanse without gave a sense of freedom
which refreshed me. I determined not to return to-night to the
gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat
and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for
their menfolk away in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great
couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I lay, I could look
at the lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and uncaring for
the dust, composed myself for sleep. I suppose I must have fallen
asleep; I hope so, but I fear, for all that followed was startlingly
real--so real that now sitting here in the broad, full sunlight of the
morning, I cannot in the least believe that it was all sleep.

I was not alone. The room was the same, unchanged in any way since I
came into it; I could see along the floor, in the brilliant moonlight,
my own footsteps marked where I had disturbed the long accumulation of
dust. In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by
their dress and manner. I thought at the time that I must be dreaming
when I saw them, for, though the moonlight was behind them, they threw
no shadow on the floor. They came close to me, and looked at me for some
time, and then whispered together. Two were dark, and had high aquiline
noses, like the Count, and great dark, piercing eyes that seemed to be
almost red when contrasted with the pale yellow moon. The other was
fair, as fair as can be, with great wavy masses of golden hair and eyes
like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and to know it
in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not recollect at the
moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth that shone like
pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was something
about them that made me uneasy, some longing and at the same time some
deadly fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would
kiss me with those red lips. It is not good to note this down, lest some
day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it is the truth.
They whispered together, and then they all three laughed--such a
silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as though the sound never could have
come through the softness of human lips. It was like the intolerable,
tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand.
The fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and the other two urged her
on. One said:--

"Go on! You are first, and we shall follow; yours is the right to
begin." The other added:--

"He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all." I lay quiet,
looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of delightful anticipation.
The fair girl advanced and bent over me till I could feel the movement
of her breath upon me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent
the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bitter
underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood.

I was afraid to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under
the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and bent over me, simply
gloating. There was a deliberate voluptuousness which was both thrilling
and repulsive, and as she arched her neck she actually licked her lips
like an animal, till I could see in the moonlight the moisture shining
on the scarlet lips and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp
teeth. Lower and lower went her head as the lips went below the range of
my mouth and chin and seemed about to fasten on my throat. Then she
paused, and I could hear the churning sound of her tongue as it licked
her teeth and lips, and could feel the hot breath on my neck. Then the
skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that
is to tickle it approaches nearer--nearer. I could feel the soft,
shivering touch of the lips on the super-sensitive skin of my throat,
and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing there.
I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating
heart.

But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as quick as
lightning. I was conscious of the presence of the Count, and of his
being as if lapped in a storm of fury. As my eyes opened involuntarily I
saw his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the fair woman and with
giant's power draw it back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, the
white teeth champing with rage, and the fair cheeks blazing red with
passion. But the Count! Never did I imagine such wrath and fury, even to
the demons of the pit. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light
in them was lurid, as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His
face was deathly pale, and the lines of it were hard like drawn wires;
the thick eyebrows that met over the nose now seemed like a heaving bar
of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his arm, he hurled the woman
from him, and then motioned to the others, as though he were beating
them back; it was the same imperious gesture that I had seen used to the
wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in a whisper seemed to
cut through the air and then ring round the room he said:--

"How dare you touch him, any of you? How dare you cast eyes on him when
I had forbidden it? Back, I tell you all! This man belongs to me! Beware
how you meddle with him, or you'll have to deal with me." The fair girl,
with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him:--

"You yourself never loved; you never love!" On this the other women
joined, and such a mirthless, hard, soulless laughter rang through the
room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like the pleasure
of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face attentively,
and said in a soft whisper:--

"Yes, I too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it
not so? Well, now I promise you that when I am done with him you shall
kiss him at your will. Now go! go! I must awaken him, for there is work
to be done."

"Are we to have nothing to-night?" said one of them, with a low laugh,
as she pointed to the bag which he had thrown upon the floor, and which
moved as though there were some living thing within it. For answer he
nodded his head. One of the women jumped forward and opened it. If my
ears did not deceive me there was a gasp and a low wail, as of a
half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast with
horror; but as I looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful
bag. There was no door near them, and they could not have passed me
without my noticing. They simply seemed to fade into the rays of the
moonlight and pass out through the window, for I could see outside the
dim, shadowy forms for a moment before they entirely faded away.

Then the horror overcame me, and I sank down unconscious.




CHAPTER IV

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_


I awoke in my own bed. If it be that I had not dreamt, the Count must
have carried me here. I tried to satisfy myself on the subject, but
could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were
certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by
in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am
rigorously accustomed to wind it the last thing before going to bed, and
many such details. But these things are no proof, for they may have been
evidences that my mind was not as usual, and, from some cause or
another, I had certainly been much upset. I must watch for proof. Of one
thing I am glad: if it was that the Count carried me here and undressed
me, he must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are intact. I
am sure this diary would have been a mystery to him which he would not
have brooked. He would have taken or destroyed it. As I look round this
room, although it has been to me so full of fear, it is now a sort of
sanctuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful women, who
were--who _are_--waiting to suck my blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

_18 May._--I have been down to look at that room again in daylight, for
I _must_ know the truth. When I got to the doorway at the top of the
stairs I found it closed. It had been so forcibly driven against the
jamb that part of the woodwork was splintered. I could see that the bolt
of the lock had not been shot, but the door is fastened from the inside.
I fear it was no dream, and must act on this surmise.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count asked me in
the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work here
was nearly done, and that I should start for home within a few days,
another that I was starting on the next morning from the time of the
letter, and the third that I had left the castle and arrived at
Bistritz. I would fain have rebelled, but felt that in the present state
of things it would be madness to quarrel openly with the Count whilst I
am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to excite his
suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I know too much, and
that I must not live, lest I be dangerous to him; my only chance is to
prolong my opportunities. Something may occur which will give me a
chance to escape. I saw in his eyes something of that gathering wrath
which was manifest when he hurled that fair woman from him. He explained
to me that posts were few and uncertain, and that my writing now would
ensure ease of mind to my friends; and he assured me with so much
impressiveness that he would countermand the later letters, which would
be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my
prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been to create new
suspicion. I therefore pretended to fall in with his views, and asked
him what dates I should put on the letters. He calculated a minute, and
then said:--

"The first should be June 12, the second June 19, and the third June
29."

I know now the span of my life. God help me!

       *       *       *       *       *

_28 May._--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able to
send word home. A band of Szgany have come to the castle, and are
encamped in the courtyard. These Szgany are gipsies; I have notes of
them in my book. They are peculiar to this part of the world, though
allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world over. There are thousands
of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law.
They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and
call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion,
save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany
tongue.

I shall write some letters home, and shall try to get them to have them
posted. I have already spoken them through my window to begin
acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many
signs, which, however, I could not understand any more than I could
their spoken language....

       *       *       *       *       *

I have written the letters. Mina's is in shorthand, and I simply ask Mr.
Hawkins to communicate with her. To her I have explained my situation,
but without the horrors which I may only surmise. It would shock and
frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to her. Should the
letters not carry, then the Count shall not yet know my secret or the
extent of my knowledge....

       *       *       *       *       *

I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window
with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have them posted. The
man who took them pressed them to his heart and bowed, and then put them
in his cap. I could do no more. I stole back to the study, and began to
read. As the Count did not come in, I have written here....

       *       *       *       *       *

The Count has come. He sat down beside me, and said in his smoothest
voice as he opened two letters:--

"The Szgany has given me these, of which, though I know not whence they
come, I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at
it--"one is from you, and to my friend Peter Hawkins; the other"--here
he caught sight of the strange symbols as he opened the envelope, and
the dark look came into his face, and his eyes blazed wickedly--"the
other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is
not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter
and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he
went on:--

"The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, send on, since it is
yours. Your letters are sacred to me. Your pardon, my friend, that
unknowingly I did break the seal. Will you not cover it again?" He held
out the letter to me, and with a courteous bow handed me a clean
envelope. I could only redirect it and hand it to him in silence. When
he went out of the room I could hear the key turn softly. A minute later
I went over and tried it, and the door was locked.

When, an hour or two after, the Count came quietly into the room, his
coming awakened me, for I had gone to sleep on the sofa. He was very
courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had been
sleeping, he said:--

"So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest. I
may not have the pleasure to talk to-night, since there are many labours
to me; but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and went to bed,
and, strange to say, slept without dreaming. Despair has its own calms.

       *       *       *       *       *

_31 May._--This morning when I woke I thought I would provide myself
with some paper and envelopes from my bag and keep them in my pocket, so
that I might write in case I should get an opportunity, but again a
surprise, again a shock!

Every scrap of paper was gone, and with it all my notes, my memoranda,
relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact all that
might be useful to me were I once outside the castle. I sat and pondered
awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and I made search of my
portmanteau and in the wardrobe where I had placed my clothes.

The suit in which I had travelled was gone, and also my overcoat and
rug; I could find no trace of them anywhere. This looked like some new
scheme of villainy....

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 June._--This morning, as I was sitting on the edge of my bed
cudgelling my brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding
and scraping of horses' feet up the rocky path beyond the courtyard.
With joy I hurried to the window, and saw drive into the yard two great
leiter-wagons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the head of
each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt, dirty
sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I
ran to the door, intending to descend and try and join them through the
main hall, as I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a
shock: my door was fastened on the outside.

Then I ran to the window and cried to them. They looked up at me
stupidly and pointed, but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany came out,
and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they
laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised
entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely turned away.
The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick
rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks
handled them, and by their resonance as they were roughly moved. When
they were all unloaded and packed in a great heap in one corner of the
yard, the Slovaks were given some money by the Szgany, and spitting on
it for luck, lazily went each to his horse's head. Shortly afterwards, I
heard the cracking of their whips die away in the distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 June, before morning._--Last night the Count left me early, and
locked himself into his own room. As soon as I dared I ran up the
winding stair, and looked out of the window, which opened south. I
thought I would watch for the Count, for there is something going on.
The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle and are doing work of
some kind. I know it, for now and then I hear a far-away muffled sound
as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be the end of some
ruthless villainy.

I had been at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw
something coming out of the Count's window. I drew back and watched
carefully, and saw the whole man emerge. It was a new shock to me to
find that he had on the suit of clothes which I had worn whilst
travelling here, and slung over his shoulder the terrible bag which I
had seen the women take away. There could be no doubt as to his quest,
and in my garb, too! This, then, is his new scheme of evil: that he will
allow others to see me, as they think, so that he may both leave
evidence that I have been seen in the towns or villages posting my own
letters, and that any wickedness which he may do shall by the local
people be attributed to me.

It makes me rage to think that this can go on, and whilst I am shut up
here, a veritable prisoner, but without that protection of the law which
is even a criminal's right and consolation.

I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a long time sat
doggedly at the window. Then I began to notice that there were some
quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight. They were
like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in
clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I watched them with a sense of
soothing, and a sort of calm stole over me. I leaned back in the
embrasure in a more comfortable position, so that I could enjoy more
fully the aërial gambolling.

Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far
below in the valley, which was hidden from my sight. Louder it seemed to
ring in my ears, and the floating motes of dust to take new shapes to
the sound as they danced in the moonlight. I felt myself struggling to
awake to some call of my instincts; nay, my very soul was struggling,
and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to answer the call. I
was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced the dust; the
moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the mass of gloom
beyond. More and more they gathered till they seemed to take dim phantom
shapes. And then I started, broad awake and in full possession of my
senses, and ran screaming from the place. The phantom shapes, which were
becoming gradually materialised from the moonbeams, were those of the
three ghostly women to whom I was doomed. I fled, and felt somewhat
safer in my own room, where there was no moonlight and where the lamp
was burning brightly.

When a couple of hours had passed I heard something stirring in the
Count's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then
there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With a
beating heart, I tried the door; but I was locked in my prison, and
could do nothing. I sat down and simply cried.

As I sat I heard a sound in the courtyard without--the agonised cry of a
woman. I rushed to the window, and throwing it up, peered out between
the bars. There, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding her
hands over her heart as one distressed with running. She was leaning
against a corner of the gateway. When she saw my face at the window she
threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice laden with menace:--

"Monster, give me my child!"

She threw herself on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the same
words in tones which wrung my heart. Then she tore her hair and beat her
breast, and abandoned herself to all the violences of extravagant
emotion. Finally, she threw herself forward, and, though I could not see
her, I could hear the beating of her naked hands against the door.

Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the voice of the
Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to be
answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves. Before many minutes
had passed a pack of them poured, like a pent-up dam when liberated,
through the wide entrance into the courtyard.

There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves was but
short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips.

I could not pity her, for I knew now what had become of her child, and
she was better dead.

What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful
thing of night and gloom and fear?

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 June, morning._--No man knows till he has suffered from the night
how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye the morning can be. When the
sun grew so high this morning that it struck the top of the great
gateway opposite my window, the high spot which it touched seemed to me
as if the dove from the ark had lighted there. My fear fell from me as
if it had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in the warmth. I must
take action of some sort whilst the courage of the day is upon me. Last
night one of my post-dated letters went to post, the first of that fatal
series which is to blot out the very traces of my existence from the
earth.

Let me not think of it. Action!

It has always been at night-time that I have been molested or
threatened, or in some way in danger or in fear. I have not yet seen the
Count in the daylight. Can it be that he sleeps when others wake, that
he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only get into his room!
But there is no possible way. The door is always locked, no way for me.

Yes, there is a way, if one dares to take it. Where his body has gone
why may not another body go? I have seen him myself crawl from his
window. Why should not I imitate him, and go in by his window? The
chances are desperate, but my need is more desperate still. I shall risk
it. At the worst it can only be death; and a man's death is not a
calf's, and the dreaded Hereafter may still be open to me. God help me
in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and
second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina!

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, later._--I have made the effort, and God, helping me, have
come safely back to this room. I must put down every detail in order. I
went whilst my courage was fresh straight to the window on the south
side, and at once got outside on the narrow ledge of stone which runs
around the building on this side. The stones are big and roughly cut,
and the mortar has by process of time been washed away between them. I
took off my boots, and ventured out on the desperate way. I looked down
once, so as to make sure that a sudden glimpse of the awful depth would
not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes away from it. I knew pretty
well the direction and distance of the Count's window, and made for it
as well as I could, having regard to the opportunities available. I did
not feel dizzy--I suppose I was too excited--and the time seemed
ridiculously short till I found myself standing on the window-sill and
trying to raise up the sash. I was filled with agitation, however, when
I bent down and slid feet foremost in through the window. Then I looked
around for the Count, but, with surprise and gladness, made a discovery.
The room was empty! It was barely furnished with odd things, which
seemed to have never been used; the furniture was something the same
style as that in the south rooms, and was covered with dust. I looked
for the key, but it was not in the lock, and I could not find it
anywhere. The only thing I found was a great heap of gold in one
corner--gold of all kinds, Roman, and British, and Austrian, and
Hungarian, and Greek and Turkish money, covered with a film of dust, as
though it had lain long in the ground. None of it that I noticed was
less than three hundred years old. There were also chains and ornaments,
some jewelled, but all of them old and stained.

At one corner of the room was a heavy door. I tried it, for, since I
could not find the key of the room or the key of the outer door, which
was the main object of my search, I must make further examination, or
all my efforts would be in vain. It was open, and led through a stone
passage to a circular stairway, which went steeply down. I descended,
minding carefully where I went, for the stairs were dark, being only lit
by loopholes in the heavy masonry. At the bottom there was a dark,
tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the
odour of old earth newly turned. As I went through the passage the smell
grew closer and heavier. At last I pulled open a heavy door which stood
ajar, and found myself in an old, ruined chapel, which had evidently
been used as a graveyard. The roof was broken, and in two places were
steps leading to vaults, but the ground had recently been dug over, and
the earth placed in great wooden boxes, manifestly those which had been
brought by the Slovaks. There was nobody about, and I made search for
any further outlet, but there was none. Then I went over every inch of
the ground, so as not to lose a chance. I went down even into the
vaults, where the dim light struggled, although to do so was a dread to
my very soul. Into two of these I went, but saw nothing except fragments
of old coffins and piles of dust; in the third, however, I made a
discovery.

There, in one of the great boxes, of which there were fifty in all, on a
pile of newly dug earth, lay the Count! He was either dead or asleep, I
could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the
glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all
their pallor; the lips were as red as ever. But there was no sign of
movement, no pulse, no breath, no beating of the heart. I bent over him,
and tried to find any sign of life, but in vain. He could not have lain
there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in a few hours.
By the side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and there.
I thought he might have the keys on him, but when I went to search I saw
the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of hate,
though unconscious of me or my presence, that I fled from the place, and
leaving the Count's room by the window, crawled again up the castle
wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself panting upon the bed and tried
to think....

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 June._--To-day is the date of my last letter, and the Count has
taken steps to prove that it was genuine, for again I saw him leave the
castle by the same window, and in my clothes. As he went down the wall,
lizard fashion, I wished I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might
destroy him; but I fear that no weapon wrought alone by man's hand would
have any effect on him. I dared not wait to see him return, for I feared
to see those weird sisters. I came back to the library, and read there
till I fell asleep.

I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me as grimly as a man can
look as he said:--

"To-morrow, my friend, we must part. You return to your beautiful
England, I to some work which may have such an end that we may never
meet. Your letter home has been despatched; to-morrow I shall not be
here, but all shall be ready for your journey. In the morning come the
Szgany, who have some labours of their own here, and also come some
Slovaks. When they have gone, my carriage shall come for you, and shall
bear you to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to
Bistritz. But I am in hopes that I shall see more of you at Castle
Dracula." I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity.
Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word to write it in
connection with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:--

"Why may I not go to-night?"

"Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission."

"But I would walk with pleasure. I want to get away at once." He smiled,
such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that I knew there was some trick
behind his smoothness. He said:--

"And your baggage?"

"I do not care about it. I can send for it some other time."

The Count stood up, and said, with a sweet courtesy which made me rub my
eyes, it seemed so real:--

"You English have a saying which is close to my heart, for its spirit is
that which rules our _boyars_: 'Welcome the coming; speed the parting
guest.' Come with me, my dear young friend. Not an hour shall you wait
in my house against your will, though sad am I at your going, and that
you so suddenly desire it. Come!" With a stately gravity, he, with the
lamp, preceded me down the stairs and along the hall. Suddenly he
stopped.

"Hark!"

Close at hand came the howling of many wolves. It was almost as if the
sound sprang up at the rising of his hand, just as the music of a great
orchestra seems to leap under the bâton of the conductor. After a pause
of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, drew back
the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to draw it
open.

To my intense astonishment I saw that it was unlocked. Suspiciously, I
looked all round, but could see no key of any kind.

As the door began to open, the howling of the wolves without grew louder
and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed
feet as they leaped, came in through the opening door. I knew then that
to struggle at the moment against the Count was useless. With such
allies as these at his command, I could do nothing. But still the door
continued slowly to open, and only the Count's body stood in the gap.
Suddenly it struck me that this might be the moment and means of my
doom; I was to be given to the wolves, and at my own instigation. There
was a diabolical wickedness in the idea great enough for the Count, and
as a last chance I cried out:--

"Shut the door; I shall wait till morning!" and covered my face with my
hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. With one sweep of his
powerful arm, the Count threw the door shut, and the great bolts clanged
and echoed through the hall as they shot back into their places.

In silence we returned to the library, and after a minute or two I went
to my own room. The last I saw of Count Dracula was his kissing his hand
to me; with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and with a smile that
Judas in hell might be proud of.

When I was in my room and about to lie down, I thought I heard a
whispering at my door. I went to it softly and listened. Unless my ears
deceived me, I heard the voice of the Count:--

"Back, back, to your own place! Your time is not yet come. Wait! Have
patience! To-night is mine. To-morrow night is yours!" There was a low,
sweet ripple of laughter, and in a rage I threw open the door, and saw
without the three terrible women licking their lips. As I appeared they
all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away.

I came back to my room and threw myself on my knees. It is then so near
the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom I am
dear!

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 June, morning._--These may be the last words I ever write in this
diary. I slept till just before the dawn, and when I woke threw myself
on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me
ready.

At last I felt that subtle change in the air, and knew that the morning
had come. Then came the welcome cock-crow, and I felt that I was safe.
With a glad heart, I opened my door and ran down to the hall. I had seen
that the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands
that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the
massive bolts.

But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at
the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its
casement. I could see the bolt shot. It had been locked after I left the
Count.

Then a wild desire took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I
determined then and there to scale the wall again and gain the Count's
room. He might kill me, but death now seemed the happier choice of
evils. Without a pause I rushed up to the east window, and scrambled
down the wall, as before, into the Count's room. It was empty, but that
was as I expected. I could not see a key anywhere, but the heap of gold
remained. I went through the door in the corner and down the winding
stair and along the dark passage to the old chapel. I knew now well
enough where to find the monster I sought.

The great box was in the same place, close against the wall, but the lid
was laid on it, not fastened down, but with the nails ready in their
places to be hammered home. I knew I must reach the body for the key, so
I raised the lid, and laid it back against the wall; and then I saw
something which filled my very soul with horror. There lay the Count,
but looking as if his youth had been half renewed, for the white hair
and moustache were changed to dark iron-grey; the cheeks were fuller,
and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was redder than
ever, for on the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the
corners of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck. Even the deep,
burning eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for the lids and pouches
underneath were bloated. It seemed as if the whole awful creature were
simply gorged with blood. He lay like a filthy leech, exhausted with his
repletion. I shuddered as I bent over to touch him, and every sense in
me revolted at the contact; but I had to search, or I was lost. The
coming night might see my own body a banquet in a similar way to those
horrid three. I felt all over the body, but no sign could I find of the
key. Then I stopped and looked at the Count. There was a mocking smile
on the bloated face which seemed to drive me mad. This was the being I
was helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries to come
he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and
create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the
helpless. The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me
to rid the world of such a monster. There was no lethal weapon at hand,
but I seized a shovel which the workmen had been using to fill the
cases, and lifting it high, struck, with the edge downward, at the
hateful face. But as I did so the head turned, and the eyes fell full
upon me, with all their blaze of basilisk horror. The sight seemed to
paralyse me, and the shovel turned in my hand and glanced from the face,
merely making a deep gash above the forehead. The shovel fell from my
hand across the box, and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade
caught the edge of the lid which fell over again, and hid the horrid
thing from my sight. The last glimpse I had was of the bloated face,
blood-stained and fixed with a grin of malice which would have held its
own in the nethermost hell.

I thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seemed
on fire, and I waited with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I
waited I heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming
closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the
cracking of whips; the Szgany and the Slovaks of whom the Count had
spoken were coming. With a last look around and at the box which
contained the vile body, I ran from the place and gained the Count's
room, determined to rush out at the moment the door should be opened.
With strained ears, I listened, and heard downstairs the grinding of the
key in the great lock and the falling back of the heavy door. There must
have been some other means of entry, or some one had a key for one of
the locked doors. Then there came the sound of many feet tramping and
dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo. I turned to
run down again towards the vault, where I might find the new entrance;
but at the moment there seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the
door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from
the lintels flying. When I ran to push it open, I found that it was
hopelessly fast. I was again a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing
round me more closely.

As I write there is in the passage below a sound of many tramping feet
and the crash of weights being set down heavily, doubtless the boxes,
with their freight of earth. There is a sound of hammering; it is the
box being nailed down. Now I can hear the heavy feet tramping again
along the hall, with many other idle feet coming behind them.

The door is shut, and the chains rattle; there is a grinding of the key
in the lock; I can hear the key withdraw: then another door opens and
shuts; I hear the creaking of lock and bolt.

Hark! in the courtyard and down the rocky way the roll of heavy wheels,
the crack of whips, and the chorus of the Szgany as they pass into the
distance.

I am alone in the castle with those awful women. Faugh! Mina is a woman,
and there is nought in common. They are devils of the Pit!

I shall not remain alone with them; I shall try to scale the castle wall
farther than I have yet attempted. I shall take some of the gold with
me, lest I want it later. I may find a way from this dreadful place.

And then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away
from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil and his
children still walk with earthly feet!

At least God's mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the
precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man.
Good-bye, all! Mina!




CHAPTER V

_Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy Westenra._


"_9 May._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"Forgive my long delay in writing, but I have been simply overwhelmed
with work. The life of an assistant schoolmistress is sometimes trying.
I am longing to be with you, and by the sea, where we can talk together
freely and build our castles in the air. I have been working very hard
lately, because I want to keep up with Jonathan's studies, and I have
been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall
be able to be useful to Jonathan, and if I can stenograph well enough I
can take down what he wants to say in this way and write it out for
him on the typewriter, at which also I am practising very hard. He
and I sometimes write letters in shorthand, and he is keeping a
stenographic journal of his travels abroad. When I am with you I
shall keep a diary in the same way. I don't mean one of those
two-pages-to-the-week-with-Sunday-squeezed-in-a-corner diaries, but a
sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel inclined. I do not
suppose there will be much of interest to other people; but it is not
intended for them. I may show it to Jonathan some day if there is in it
anything worth sharing, but it is really an exercise book. I shall try
to do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing
descriptions and trying to remember conversations. I am told that, with
a little practice, one can remember all that goes on or that one hears
said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell you of my little
plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan
from Transylvania. He is well, and will be returning in about a week. I
am longing to hear all his news. It must be so nice to see strange
countries. I wonder if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall ever see them
together. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye.

"Your loving

"MINA.

"Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me anything for
a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome,
curly-haired man???"


_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_.

"_17, Chatham Street_,

"_Wednesday_.

"My dearest Mina,--

"I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. I
wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your
_second_. Besides, I have nothing to tell you. There is really nothing
to interest you. Town is very pleasant just now, and we go a good deal
to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. As to the
tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it was the one who was with me at the
last Pop. Some one has evidently been telling tales. That was Mr.
Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and he and mamma get on very well
together; they have so many things to talk about in common. We met some
time ago a man that would just _do for you_, if you were not already
engaged to Jonathan. He is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well
off, and of good birth. He is a doctor and really clever. Just fancy! He
is only nine-and-twenty, and he has an immense lunatic asylum all under
his own care. Mr. Holmwood introduced him to me, and he called here to
see us, and often comes now. I think he is one of the most resolute men
I ever saw, and yet the most calm. He seems absolutely imperturbable. I
can fancy what a wonderful power he must have over his patients. He has
a curious habit of looking one straight in the face, as if trying to
read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much with me, but I flatter
myself he has got a tough nut to crack. I know that from my glass. Do
you ever try to read your own face? _I do_, and I can tell you it is not
a bad study, and gives you more trouble than you can well fancy if you
have never tried it. He says that I afford him a curious psychological
study, and I humbly think I do. I do not, as you know, take sufficient
interest in dress to be able to describe the new fashions. Dress is a
bore. That is slang again, but never mind; Arthur says that every day.
There, it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other
since we were _children_; we have slept together and eaten together, and
laughed and cried together; and now, though I have spoken, I would like
to speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blushing
as I write, for although I _think_ he loves me, he has not told me so in
words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him; I love him! There, that
does me good. I wish I were with you, dear, sitting by the fire
undressing, as we used to sit; and I would try to tell you what I feel.
I do not know how I am writing this even to you. I am afraid to stop,
or I should tear up the letter, and I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so
want to tell you all. Let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all
that you think about it. Mina, I must stop. Good-night. Bless me in your
prayers; and, Mina, pray for my happiness.

"LUCY.

"P.S.--I need not tell you this is a secret. Good-night again.

"L."

_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_.

"_24 May_.

"My dearest Mina,--

"Thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter. It was so
nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy.

"My dear, it never rains but it pours. How true the old proverbs are.
Here am I, who shall be twenty in September, and yet I never had a
proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day I have had three.
Just fancy! THREE proposals in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry,
really and truly sorry, for two of the poor fellows. Oh, Mina, I am so
happy that I don't know what to do with myself. And three proposals!
But, for goodness' sake, don't tell any of the girls, or they would be
getting all sorts of extravagant ideas and imagining themselves injured
and slighted if in their very first day at home they did not get six at
least. Some girls are so vain! You and I, Mina dear, who are engaged and
are going to settle down soon soberly into old married women, can
despise vanity. Well, I must tell you about the three, but you must keep
it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, Jonathan. You
will tell him, because I would, if I were in your place, certainly tell
Arthur. A woman ought to tell her husband everything--don't you think
so, dear?--and I must be fair. Men like women, certainly their wives, to
be quite as fair as they are; and women, I am afraid, are not always
quite as fair as they should be. Well, my dear, number One came just
before lunch. I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum
man, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was very cool
outwardly, but was nervous all the same. He had evidently been schooling
himself as to all sorts of little things, and remembered them; but he
almost managed to sit down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do
when they are cool, and then when he wanted to appear at ease he kept
playing with a lancet in a way that made me nearly scream. He spoke to
me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me how dear I was to him,
though he had known me so little, and what his life would be with me to
help and cheer him. He was going to tell me how unhappy he would be if I
did not care for him, but when he saw me cry he said that he was a brute
and would not add to my present trouble. Then he broke off and asked if
I could love him in time; and when I shook my head his hands trembled,
and then with some hesitation he asked me if I cared already for any one
else. He put it very nicely, saying that he did not want to wring my
confidence from me, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was
free a man might have hope. And then, Mina, I felt a sort of duty to
tell him that there was some one. I only told him that much, and then he
stood up, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took both my
hands in his and said he hoped I would be happy, and that if I ever
wanted a friend I must count him one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't
help crying: and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being
proposed to is all very nice and all that sort of thing, but it isn't at
all a happy thing when you have to see a poor fellow, whom you know
loves you honestly, going away and looking all broken-hearted, and to
know that, no matter what he may say at the moment, you are passing
quite out of his life. My dear, I must stop here at present, I feel so
miserable, though I am so happy.

"_Evening._

"Arthur has just gone, and I feel in better spirits than when I left
off, so I can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, number Two
came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and
he looks so young and so fresh that it seems almost impossible that he
has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise
with poor Desdemona when she had such a dangerous stream poured in her
ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women are such cowards that
we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now
what I would do if I were a man and wanted to make a girl love me. No, I
don't, for there was Mr. Morris telling us his stories, and Arthur never
told any, and yet---- My dear, I am somewhat previous. Mr. Quincey P.
Morris found me alone. It seems that a man always does find a girl
alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and I
helping him all I could; I am not ashamed to say it now. I must tell you
beforehand that Mr. Morris doesn't always speak slang--that is to say,
he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is really well
educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that it amused me
to hear him talk American slang, and whenever I was present, and there
was no one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I am afraid, my
dear, he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he
has to say. But this is a way slang has. I do not know myself if I shall
ever speak slang; I do not know if Arthur likes it, as I have never
heard him use any as yet. Well, Mr. Morris sat down beside me and looked
as happy and jolly as he could, but I could see all the same that he was
very nervous. He took my hand in his, and said ever so sweetly:--

"'Miss Lucy, I know I ain't good enough to regulate the fixin's of your
little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you
will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't
you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go down the long road
together, driving in double harness?'

"Well, he did look so good-humoured and so jolly that it didn't seem
half so hard to refuse him as it did poor Dr. Seward; so I said, as
lightly as I could, that I did not know anything of hitching, and that I
wasn't broken to harness at all yet. Then he said that he had spoken in
a light manner, and he hoped that if he had made a mistake in doing so
on so grave, so momentous, an occasion for him, I would forgive him. He
really did look serious when he was saying it, and I couldn't help
feeling a bit serious too--I know, Mina, you will think me a horrid
flirt--though I couldn't help feeling a sort of exultation that he was
number two in one day. And then, my dear, before I could say a word he
began pouring out a perfect torrent of love-making, laying his very
heart and soul at my feet. He looked so earnest over it that I shall
never again think that a man must be playful always, and never earnest,
because he is merry at times. I suppose he saw something in my face
which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with a sort of
manly fervour that I could have loved him for if I had been free:--

"'Lucy, you are an honest-hearted girl, I know. I should not be here
speaking to you as I am now if I did not believe you clean grit, right
through to the very depths of your soul. Tell me, like one good fellow
to another, is there any one else that you care for? And if there is
I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will
let me, a very faithful friend.'

"My dear Mina, why are men so noble when we women are so little worthy
of them? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true
gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think
this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very
badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want
her, and save all this trouble? But this is heresy, and I must not say
it. I am glad to say that, though I was crying, I was able to look into
Mr. Morris's brave eyes, and I told him out straight:--

"'Yes, there is some one I love, though he has not told me yet that he
even loves me.' I was right to speak to him so frankly, for quite a
light came into his face, and he put out both his hands and took mine--I
think I put them into his--and said in a hearty way:--

"'That's my brave girl. It's better worth being late for a chance of
winning you than being in time for any other girl in the world. Don't
cry, my dear. If it's for me, I'm a hard nut to crack; and I take it
standing up. If that other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd
better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with me. Little girl,
your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and that's rarer than a
lover; it's more unselfish anyhow. My dear, I'm going to have a pretty
lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss?
It'll be something to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you
know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a good fellow,
my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken
yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and
noble, too, to a rival--wasn't it?--and he so sad; so I leant over and
kissed him. He stood up with my two hands in his, and as he looked down
into my face--I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:--

"'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if these
things don't make us friends nothing ever will. Thank you for your sweet
honesty to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and taking up his hat,
went straight out of the room without looking back, without a tear or a
quiver or a pause; and I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like
that be made unhappy when there are lots of girls about who would
worship the very ground he trod on? I know I would if I were free--only
I don't want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and I feel I
cannot write of happiness just at once, after telling you of it; and I
don't wish to tell of the number three until it can be all happy.

"Ever your loving

"LUCY.

"P.S.--Oh, about number Three--I needn't tell you of number Three, need
I? Besides, it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his
coming into the room till both his arms were round me, and he was
kissing me. I am very, very happy, and I don't know what I have done to
deserve it. I must only try in the future to show that I am not
ungrateful to God for all His goodness to me in sending to me such a
lover, such a husband, and such a friend.

"Good-bye."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

(Kept in phonograph)

_25 May._--Ebb tide in appetite to-day. Cannot eat, cannot rest, so
diary instead. Since my rebuff of yesterday I have a sort of empty
feeling; nothing in the world seems of sufficient importance to be worth
the doing.... As I knew that the only cure for this sort of thing was
work, I went down amongst the patients. I picked out one who has
afforded me a study of much interest. He is so quaint that I am
determined to understand him as well as I can. To-day I seemed to get
nearer than ever before to the heart of his mystery.

I questioned him more fully than I had ever done, with a view to making
myself master of the facts of his hallucination. In my manner of doing
it there was, I now see, something of cruelty. I seemed to wish to keep
him to the point of his madness--a thing which I avoid with the patients
as I would the mouth of hell.

(_Mem._, under what circumstances would I _not_ avoid the pit of hell?)
_Omnia Romæ venalia sunt._ Hell has its price! _verb. sap._ If there be
anything behind this instinct it will be valuable to trace it afterwards
_accurately_, so I had better commence to do so, therefore--

R. M. Renfield, ætat 59.--Sanguine temperament; great physical strength;
morbidly excitable; periods of gloom, ending in some fixed idea which I
cannot make out. I presume that the sanguine temperament itself and the
disturbing influence end in a mentally-accomplished finish; a possibly
dangerous man, probably dangerous if unselfish. In selfish men caution
is as secure an armour for their foes as for themselves. What I think of
on this point is, when self is the fixed point the centripetal force is
balanced with the centrifugal; when duty, a cause, etc., is the fixed
point, the latter force is paramount, and only accident or a series of
accidents can balance it.


_Letter, Quincey P. Morris to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

"_25 May._

"My dear Art,--

"We've told yarns by the camp-fire in the prairies; and dressed one
another's wounds after trying a landing at the Marquesas; and drunk
healths on the shore of Titicaca. There are more yarns to be told, and
other wounds to be healed, and another health to be drunk. Won't you let
this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? I have no hesitation in asking
you, as I know a certain lady is engaged to a certain dinner-party, and
that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the
Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our
weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to
the happiest man in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart
that God has made and the best worth winning. We promise you a hearty
welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right
hand. We shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to
a certain pair of eyes. Come!

"Yours, as ever and always,

"QUINCEY P. MORRIS."


_Telegram from Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._

"_26 May._

"Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears
tingle.

"ART."




CHAPTER VI

MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


_24 July. Whitby._--Lucy met me at the station, looking sweeter and
lovelier than ever, and we drove up to the house at the Crescent in
which they have rooms. This is a lovely place. The little river, the
Esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes near the
harbour. A great viaduct runs across, with high piers, through which the
view seems somehow further away than it really is. The valley is
beautifully green, and it is so steep that when you are on the high land
on either side you look right across it, unless you are near enough to
see down. The houses of the old town--the side away from us--are all
red-roofed, and seem piled up one over the other anyhow, like the
pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby
Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene of part of
"Marmion," where the girl was built up in the wall. It is a most noble
ruin, of immense size, and full of beautiful and romantic bits; there is
a legend that a white lady is seen in one of the windows. Between it and
the town there is another church, the parish one, round which is a big
graveyard, all full of tombstones. This is to my mind the nicest spot in
Whitby, for it lies right over the town, and has a full view of the
harbour and all up the bay to where the headland called Kettleness
stretches out into the sea. It descends so steeply over the harbour that
part of the bank has fallen away, and some of the graves have been
destroyed. In one place part of the stonework of the graves stretches
out over the sandy pathway far below. There are walks, with seats beside
them, through the churchyard; and people go and sit there all day long
looking at the beautiful view and enjoying the breeze. I shall come and
sit here very often myself and work. Indeed, I am writing now, with my
book on my knee, and listening to the talk of three old men who are
sitting beside me. They seem to do nothing all day but sit up here and
talk.

The harbour lies below me, with, on the far side, one long granite wall
stretching out into the sea, with a curve outwards at the end of it, in
the middle of which is a lighthouse. A heavy sea-wall runs along outside
of it. On the near side, the sea-wall makes an elbow crooked inversely,
and its end too has a lighthouse. Between the two piers there is a
narrow opening into the harbour, which then suddenly widens.

It is nice at high water; but when the tide is out it shoals away to
nothing, and there is merely the stream of the Esk, running between
banks of sand, with rocks here and there. Outside the harbour on this
side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of
which runs straight out from behind the south lighthouse. At the end of
it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather, and sends in a
mournful sound on the wind. They have a legend here that when a ship is
lost bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the old man about this; he
is coming this way....

He is a funny old man. He must be awfully old, for his face is all
gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. He tells me that he is
nearly a hundred, and that he was a sailor in the Greenland fishing
fleet when Waterloo was fought. He is, I am afraid, a very sceptical
person, for when I asked him about the bells at sea and the White Lady
at the abbey he said very brusquely:--

"I wouldn't fash masel' about them, miss. Them things be all wore out.
Mind, I don't say that they never was, but I do say that they wasn't in
my time. They be all very well for comers and trippers, an' the like,
but not for a nice young lady like you. Them feet-folks from York and
Leeds that be always eatin' cured herrin's an' drinkin' tea an' lookin'
out to buy cheap jet would creed aught. I wonder masel' who'd be
bothered tellin' lies to them--even the newspapers, which is full of
fool-talk." I thought he would be a good person to learn interesting
things from, so I asked him if he would mind telling me something about
the whale-fishing in the old days. He was just settling himself to begin
when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and said:--

"I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like
to be kept waitin' when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to
crammle aboon the grees, for there be a many of 'em; an', miss, I lack
belly-timber sairly by the clock."

He hobbled away, and I could see him hurrying, as well as he could, down
the steps. The steps are a great feature on the place. They lead from
the town up to the church, there are hundreds of them--I do not know how
many--and they wind up in a delicate curve; the slope is so gentle that
a horse could easily walk up and down them. I think they must originally
have had something to do with the abbey. I shall go home too. Lucy went
out visiting with her mother, and as they were only duty calls, I did
not go. They will be home by this.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 August._--I came up here an hour ago with Lucy, and we had a most
interesting talk with my old friend and the two others who always come
and join him. He is evidently the Sir Oracle of them, and I should think
must have been in his time a most dictatorial person. He will not admit
anything, and downfaces everybody. If he can't out-argue them he bullies
them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his views. Lucy
was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got a
beautiful colour since she has been here. I noticed that the old men did
not lose any time in coming up and sitting near her when we sat down.
She is so sweet with old people; I think they all fell in love with her
on the spot. Even my old man succumbed and did not contradict her, but
gave me double share instead. I got him on the subject of the legends,
and he went off at once into a sort of sermon. I must try to remember it
and put it down:--

"It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that's what it be, an'
nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' barguests an' bogles
an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women
a-belderin'. They be nowt but air-blebs. They, an' all grims an' signs
an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome beuk-bodies an'
railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do
somethin' that they don't other incline to. It makes me ireful to think
o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper
an' preachin' them out of pulpits, does want to be cuttin' them on the
tombstones. Look here all around you in what airt ye will; all them
steans, holdin' up their heads as well as they can out of their pride,
is acant--simply tumblin' down with the weight o' the lies wrote on
them, 'Here lies the body' or 'Sacred to the memory' wrote on all of
them, an' yet in nigh half of them there bean't no bodies at all; an'
the memories of them bean't cared a pinch of snuff about, much less
sacred. Lies all of them, nothin' but lies of one kind or another! My
gog, but it'll be a quare scowderment at the Day of Judgment when they
come tumblin' up in their death-sarks, all jouped together an' tryin' to
drag their tombsteans with them to prove how good they was; some of them
trimmlin' and ditherin', with their hands that dozzened an' slippy from
lyin' in the sea that they can't even keep their grup o' them."

I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the way in
which he looked round for the approval of his cronies that he was
"showing off," so I put in a word to keep him going:--

"Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Surely these tombstones are not
all wrong?"

"Yabblins! There may be a poorish few not wrong, savin' where they make
out the people too good; for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl be
like the sea, if only it be their own. The whole thing be only lies. Now
look you here; you come here a stranger, an' you see this kirk-garth." I
nodded, for I thought it better to assent, though I did not quite
understand his dialect. I knew it had something to do with the church.
He went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be
happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where
the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as
old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his companions,
and they all laughed. "And my gog! how could they be otherwise? Look at
that one, the aftest abaft the bier-bank: read it!" I went over and
read:--

"Edward Spencelagh, master mariner, murdered by pirates off the coast of
Andres, April, 1854, æt. 30." When I came back Mr. Swales went on:--

"Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast
of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a
dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed
northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the
steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of
the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in
the _Lively_ off Greenland in '20; or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in the
same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year
later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned
in the Gulf of Finland in '50. Do ye think that all these men will have
to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums
aboot it! I tell ye that when they got here they'd be jommlin' an'
jostlin' one another that way that it 'ud be like a fight up on the ice
in the old days, when we'd be at one another from daylight to dark, an'
tryin' to tie up our cuts by the light of the aurora borealis." This was
evidently local pleasantry, for the old man cackled over it, and his
cronies joined in with gusto.

"But," I said, "surely you are not quite correct, for you start on the
assumption that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to
take their tombstones with them on the Day of Judgment. Do you think
that will be really necessary?"

"Well, what else be they tombstones for? Answer me that, miss!"

"To please their relatives, I suppose."

"To please their relatives, you suppose!" This he said with intense
scorn. "How will it pleasure their relatives to know that lies is wrote
over them, and that everybody in the place knows that they be lies?" He
pointed to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, on
which the seat was rested, close to the edge of the cliff. "Read the
lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me
from where I sat, but Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over
and read:--

"Sacred to the memory of George Canon, who died, in the hope of a
glorious resurrection, on July, 29, 1873, falling from the rocks at
Kettleness. This tomb was erected by his sorrowing mother to her dearly
beloved son. 'He was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.'
Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke
her comment very gravely and somewhat severely.

"Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm the
sorrowin' mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was
acrewk'd--a regular lamiter he was--an' he hated her so that he
committed suicide in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on
his life. He blew nigh the top of his head off with an old musket that
they had for scarin' the crows with. 'Twarn't for crows then, for it
brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That's the way he fell off the
rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him
say masel' that he hoped he'd go to hell, for his mother was so pious
that she'd be sure to go to heaven, an' he didn't want to addle where
she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his
stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gabriel keckle
when Geordie comes pantin' up the grees with the tombstean balanced on
his hump, and asks it to be took as evidence!"

I did not know what to say, but Lucy turned the conversation as she
said, rising up:--

"Oh, why did you tell us of this? It is my favourite seat, and I cannot
leave it; and now I find I must go on sitting over the grave of a
suicide."

"That won't harm ye, my pretty; an' it may make poor Geordie gladsome to
have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap. That won't hurt ye. Why, I've
sat here off an' on for nigh twenty years past, an' it hasn't done me
no harm. Don't ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that doesn' lie
there either! It'll be time for ye to be getting scart when ye see the
tombsteans all run away with, and the place as bare as a stubble-field.
There's the clock, an' I must gang. My service to ye, ladies!" And off
he hobbled.

Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was all so beautiful before us that we
took hands as we sat; and she told me all over again about Arthur and
their coming marriage. That made me just a little heart-sick, for I
haven't heard from Jonathan for a whole month.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The same day._ I came up here alone, for I am very sad. There was no
letter for me. I hope there cannot be anything the matter with Jonathan.
The clock has just struck nine. I see the lights scattered all over the
town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and sometimes singly;
they run right up the Esk and die away in the curve of the valley. To my
left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old house next
the abbey. The sheep and lambs are bleating in the fields away behind
me, and there is a clatter of a donkey's hoofs up the paved road below.
The band on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and further
along the quay there is a Salvation Army meeting in a back street.
Neither of the bands hears the other, but up here I hear and see them
both. I wonder where Jonathan is and if he is thinking of me! I wish he
were here.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_5 June._--The case of Renfield grows more interesting the more I get to
understand the man. He has certain qualities very largely developed;
selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I could get at what is the
object of the latter. He seems to have some settled scheme of his own,
but what it is I do not yet know. His redeeming quality is a love of
animals, though, indeed, he has such curious turns in it that I
sometimes imagine he is only abnormally cruel. His pets are of odd
sorts. Just now his hobby is catching flies. He has at present such a
quantity that I have had myself to expostulate. To my astonishment, he
did not break out into a fury, as I expected, but took the matter in
simple seriousness. He thought for a moment, and then said: "May I have
three days? I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that would do. I
must watch him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_18 June._--He has turned his mind now to spiders, and has got several
very big fellows in a box. He keeps feeding them with his flies, and
the number of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he
has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his
room.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 July._--His spiders are now becoming as great a nuisance as his
flies, and to-day I told him that he must get rid of them. He looked
very sad at this, so I said that he must clear out some of them, at all
events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I gave him the same time
as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when a
horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room,
he caught it, held it exultantly for a few moments between his finger
and thumb, and, before I knew what he was going to do, put it in his
mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it
was very good and very wholesome; that it was life, strong life, and
gave life to him. This gave me an idea, or the rudiment of one. I must
watch how he gets rid of his spiders. He has evidently some deep problem
in his mind, for he keeps a little note-book in which he is always
jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of
figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the
totals added in batches again, as though he were "focussing" some
account, as the auditors put it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary idea in
my mind is growing. It will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh,
unconscious cerebration! you will have to give the wall to your
conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for a few days, so that I
might notice if there were any change. Things remain as they were except
that he has parted with some of his pets and got a new one. He has
managed to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. His means
of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished. Those that
do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the flies by
tempting them with his food.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 July._--We are progressing. My friend has now a whole colony of
sparrows, and his flies and spiders are almost obliterated. When I came
in he ran to me and said he wanted to ask me a great favour--a very,
very great favour; and as he spoke he fawned on me like a dog. I asked
him what it was, and he said, with a sort of rapture in his voice and
bearing:--

"A kitten, a nice little, sleek playful kitten, that I can play with,
and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I was not unprepared for this
request, for I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and
vivacity, but I did not care that his pretty family of tame sparrows
should be wiped out in the same manner as the flies and the spiders; so
I said I would see about it, and asked him if he would not rather have a
cat than a kitten. His eagerness betrayed him as he answered:--

"Oh, yes, I would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should
refuse me a cat. No one would refuse me a kitten, would they?" I shook
my head, and said that at present I feared it would not be possible, but
that I would see about it. His face fell, and I could see a warning of
danger in it, for there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant
killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him
with his present craving and see how it will work out; then I shall know
more.

       *       *       *       *       *

_10 p. m._--I have visited him again and found him sitting in a corner
brooding. When I came in he threw himself on his knees before me and
implored me to let him have a cat; that his salvation depended upon it.
I was firm, however, and told him that he could not have it, whereupon
he went without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner
where I had found him. I shall see him in the morning early.

       *       *       *       *       *

_20 July._--Visited Renfield very early, before the attendant went his
rounds. Found him up and humming a tune. He was spreading out his sugar,
which he had saved, in the window, and was manifestly beginning his
fly-catching again; and beginning it cheerfully and with a good grace. I
looked around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they
were. He replied, without turning round, that they had all flown away.
There were a few feathers about the room and on his pillow a drop of
blood. I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report to me if
there were anything odd about him during the day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 a. m._--The attendant has just been to me to say that Renfield has
been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. "My belief is,
doctor," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he just took
and ate them raw!"

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 p. m._--I gave Renfield a strong opiate to-night, enough to make
even him sleep, and took away his pocket-book to look at it. The thought
that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and the theory
proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have to
invent a new classification for him, and call him a zoöphagous
(life-eating) maniac; what he desires is to absorb as many lives as he
can, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cumulative way. He
gave many flies to one spider and many spiders to one bird, and then
wanted a cat to eat the many birds. What would have been his later
steps? It would almost be worth while to complete the experiment. It
might be done if there were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at
vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science
in its most difficult and vital aspect--the knowledge of the brain? Had
I even the secret of one such mind--did I hold the key to the fancy of
even one lunatic--I might advance my own branch of science to a pitch
compared with which Burdon-Sanderson's physiology or Ferrier's
brain-knowledge would be as nothing. If only there were a sufficient
cause! I must not think too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good
cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an
exceptional brain, congenitally?

How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I
wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has
closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. How
many of us begin a new record with each day of our lives?

To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope,
and that truly I began a new record. So it will be until the Great
Recorder sums me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to
profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with you, nor can I be
angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must only wait on
hopeless and work. Work! work!

If I only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there--a
good, unselfish cause to make me work--that would be indeed happiness.


_Mina Murray's Journal._

_26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here; it
is like whispering to one's self and listening at the same time. And
there is also something about the shorthand symbols that makes it
different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I
had not heard from Jonathan for some time, and was very concerned; but
yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter from
him. I had written asking him if he had heard, and he said the enclosed
had just been received. It is only a line dated from Castle Dracula,
and says that he is just starting for home. That is not like Jonathan;
I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Then, too, Lucy,
although she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in
her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we have decided
that I am to lock the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has
got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and
along the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and fall over
with a despairing cry that echoes all over the place. Poor dear, she is
naturally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that her husband, Lucy's
father, had the same habit; that he would get up in the night and dress
himself and go out, if he were not stopped. Lucy is to be married in the
autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her house is
to be arranged. I sympathise with her, for I do the same, only Jonathan
and I will start in life in a very simple way, and shall have to try to
make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only
son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he can
leave town, for his father is not very well, and I think dear Lucy is
counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him up to the seat
on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it
is the waiting which disturbs her; she will be all right when he
arrives.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting quite uneasy about him,
though why I should I do not know; but I do wish that he would write, if
it were only a single line. Lucy walks more than ever, and each night I
am awakened by her moving about the room. Fortunately, the weather is so
hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and the perpetually
being wakened is beginning to tell on me, and I am getting nervous and
wakeful myself. Thank God, Lucy's health keeps up. Mr. Holmwood has been
suddenly called to Ring to see his father, who has been taken seriously
ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not touch
her looks; she is a trifle stouter, and her cheeks are a lovely
rose-pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I pray it will
all last.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 August._--Another week gone, and no news from Jonathan, not even to
Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have heard. Oh, I do hope he is not ill. He
surely would have written. I look at that last letter of his, but
somehow it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it is
his writing. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in
her sleep the last week, but there is an odd concentration about her
which I do not understand; even in her sleep she seems to be watching
me. She tries the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room
searching for the key.

_6 August._--Another three days, and no news. This suspense is getting
dreadful. If I only knew where to write to or where to go to, I should
feel easier; but no one has heard a word of Jonathan since that last
letter. I must only pray to God for patience. Lucy is more excitable
than ever, but is otherwise well. Last night was very threatening, and
the fishermen say that we are in for a storm. I must try to watch it and
learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun as I write is
hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except
the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock;
grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the
grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The sea
is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar,
muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey
mist. All is vastness; the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and
there is a "brool" over the sea that sounds like some presage of doom.
Dark figures are on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in
the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are
racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into
the harbour, bending to the scuppers. Here comes old Mr. Swales. He is
making straight for me, and I can see, by the way he lifts his hat, that
he wants to talk....

I have been quite touched by the change in the poor old man. When he sat
down beside me, he said in a very gentle way:--

"I want to say something to you, miss." I could see he was not at ease,
so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to speak
fully; so he said, leaving his hand in mine:--

"I'm afraid, my deary, that I must have shocked you by all the wicked
things I've been sayin' about the dead, and such like, for weeks past;
but I didn't mean them, and I want ye to remember that when I'm gone. We
aud folks that be daffled, and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't
altogether like to think of it, and we don't want to feel scart of it;
an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I'd cheer up my
own heart a bit. But, Lord love ye, miss, I ain't afraid of dyin', not a
bit; only I don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at
hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred years is too much for any man to
expect; and I'm so nigh it that the Aud Man is already whettin' his
scythe. Ye see, I can't get out o' the habit of caffin' about it all at
once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of
Death will sound his trumpet for me. But don't ye dooal an' greet, my
deary!"--for he saw that I was crying--"if he should come this very
night I'd not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all, only a
waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin'; and death be all that
we can rightly depend on. But I'm content, for it's comin' to me, my
deary, and comin' quick. It may be comin' while we be lookin' and
wonderin'. Maybe it's in that wind out over the sea that's bringin' with
it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. Look! look!" he
cried suddenly. "There's something in that wind and in the hoast beyont
that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in the
air; I feel it comin'. Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call
comes!" He held up his arms devoutly, and raised his hat. His mouth
moved as though he were praying. After a few minutes' silence, he got
up, shook hands with me, and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled
off. It all touched me, and upset me very much.

I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his
arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the time
kept looking at a strange ship.

"I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Russian, by the look of her;
but she's knocking about in the queerest way. She doesn't know her mind
a bit; she seems to see the storm coming, but can't decide whether to
run up north in the open, or to put in here. Look there again! She is
steered mighty strangely, for she doesn't mind the hand on the wheel;
changes about with every puff of wind. We'll hear more of her before
this time to-morrow."




CHAPTER VII

CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST


(_Pasted in Mina Murray's Journal._)

From a Correspondent.

_Whitby_.

One of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been
experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had
been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of
August. Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the great
body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods,
Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staithes, and the various trips in
the neighbourhood of Whitby. The steamers _Emma_ and _Scarborough_ made
trips up and down the coast, and there was an unusual amount of
"tripping" both to and from Whitby. The day was unusually fine till the
afternoon, when some of the gossips who frequent the East Cliff
churchyard, and from that commanding eminence watch the wide sweep of
sea visible to the north and east, called attention to a sudden show of
"mares'-tails" high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then
blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical
language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once
made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half a century has
kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic
manner the coming of a sudden storm. The approach of sunset was so very
beautiful, so grand in its masses of splendidly-coloured clouds, that
there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the old
churchyard to enjoy the beauty. Before the sun dipped below the black
mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its
downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame,
purple, pink, green, violet, and all the tints of gold; with here and
there masses not large, but of seemingly absolute blackness, in all
sorts of shapes, as well outlined as colossal silhouettes. The
experience was not lost on the painters, and doubtless some of the
sketches of the "Prelude to the Great Storm" will grace the R. A. and R.
I. walls in May next. More than one captain made up his mind then and
there that his "cobble" or his "mule," as they term the different
classes of boats, would remain in the harbour till the storm had passed.
The wind fell away entirely during the evening, and at midnight there
was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on
the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive nature. There
were but few lights in sight at sea, for even the coasting steamers,
which usually "hug" the shore so closely, kept well to seaward, and but
few fishing-boats were in sight. The only sail noticeable was a foreign
schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The
foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for
comment whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal
her to reduce sail in face of her danger. Before the night shut down she
was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating
swell of the sea,

    "As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean."

Shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air grew quite
oppressive, and the silence was so marked that the bleating of a sheep
inland or the barking of a dog in the town was distinctly heard, and the
band on the pier, with its lively French air, was like a discord in the
great harmony of nature's silence. A little after midnight came a
strange sound from over the sea, and high overhead the air began to
carry a strange, faint, hollow booming.

Then without warning the tempest broke. With a rapidity which, at the
time, seemed incredible, and even afterwards is impossible to realize,
the whole aspect of nature at once became convulsed. The waves rose in
growing fury, each overtopping its fellow, till in a very few minutes
the lately glassy sea was like a roaring and devouring monster.
White-crested waves beat madly on the level sands and rushed up the
shelving cliffs; others broke over the piers, and with their spume swept
the lanthorns of the lighthouses which rise from the end of either pier
of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such
force that it was with difficulty that even strong men kept their feet,
or clung with grim clasp to the iron stanchions. It was found necessary
to clear the entire piers from the mass of onlookers, or else the
fatalities of the night would have been increased manifold. To add to
the difficulties and dangers of the time, masses of sea-fog came
drifting inland--white, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly fashion,
so dank and damp and cold that it needed but little effort of
imagination to think that the spirits of those lost at sea were
touching their living brethren with the clammy hands of death, and many
a one shuddered as the wreaths of sea-mist swept by. At times the mist
cleared, and the sea for some distance could be seen in the glare of the
lightning, which now came thick and fast, followed by such sudden peals
of thunder that the whole sky overhead seemed trembling under the shock
of the footsteps of the storm.

Some of the scenes thus revealed were of immeasurable grandeur and of
absorbing interest--the sea, running mountains high, threw skywards with
each wave mighty masses of white foam, which the tempest seemed to
snatch at and whirl away into space; here and there a fishing-boat, with
a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the blast; now and again
the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of the East
Cliff the new searchlight was ready for experiment, but had not yet been
tried. The officers in charge of it got it into working order, and in
the pauses of the inrushing mist swept with it the surface of the sea.
Once or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat,
with gunwale under water, rushed into the harbour, able, by the guidance
of the sheltering light, to avoid the danger of dashing against the
piers. As each boat achieved the safety of the port there was a shout of
joy from the mass of people on shore, a shout which for a moment seemed
to cleave the gale and was then swept away in its rush.

Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner
with all sails set, apparently the same vessel which had been noticed
earlier in the evening. The wind had by this time backed to the east,
and there was a shudder amongst the watchers on the cliff as they
realized the terrible danger in which she now was. Between her and the
port lay the great flat reef on which so many good ships have from time
to time suffered, and, with the wind blowing from its present quarter,
it would be quite impossible that she should fetch the entrance of the
harbour. It was now nearly the hour of high tide, but the waves were so
great that in their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost
visible, and the schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such
speed that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere,
if it was only in hell." Then came another rush of sea-fog, greater than
any hitherto--a mass of dank mist, which seemed to close on all things
like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing,
for the roar of the tempest, and the crash of the thunder, and the
booming of the mighty billows came through the damp oblivion even louder
than before. The rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the harbour
mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited
breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant
of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between
the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed,
swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and
gained the safety of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a
shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a
corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each
motion of the ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great
awe came on all as they realised that the ship, as if by a miracle, had
found the harbour, unsteered save by the hand of a dead man! However,
all took place more quickly than it takes to write these words. The
schooner paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on
that accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many
storms into the south-east corner of the pier jutting under the East
Cliff, known locally as Tate Hill Pier.

There was of course a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up on
the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of the
"top-hammer" came crashing down. But, strangest of all, the very instant
the shore was touched, an immense dog sprang up on deck from below, as
if shot up by the concussion, and running forward, jumped from the bow
on the sand. Making straight for the steep cliff, where the churchyard
hangs over the laneway to the East Pier so steeply that some of the flat
tombstones--"thruff-steans" or "through-stones," as they call them in
the Whitby vernacular--actually project over where the sustaining cliff
has fallen away, it disappeared in the darkness, which seemed
intensified just beyond the focus of the searchlight.

It so happened that there was no one at the moment on Tate Hill Pier, as
all those whose houses are in close proximity were either in bed or were
out on the heights above. Thus the coastguard on duty on the eastern
side of the harbour, who at once ran down to the little pier, was the
first to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after scouring
the entrance of the harbour without seeing anything, then turned the
light on the derelict and kept it there. The coastguard ran aft, and
when he came beside the wheel, bent over to examine it, and recoiled at
once as though under some sudden emotion. This seemed to pique general
curiosity, and quite a number of people began to run. It is a good way
round from the West Cliff by the Drawbridge to Tate Hill Pier, but your
correspondent is a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd.
When I arrived, however, I found already assembled on the pier a crowd,
whom the coastguard and police refused to allow to come on board. By the
courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted
to climb on deck, and was one of a small group who saw the dead seaman
whilst actually lashed to the wheel.

It was no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for
not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened
by his hands, tied one over the other, to a spoke of the wheel. Between
the inner hand and the wood was a crucifix, the set of beads on which it
was fastened being around both wrists and wheel, and all kept fast by
the binding cords. The poor fellow may have been seated at one time, but
the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through the rudder of
the wheel and dragged him to and fro, so that the cords with which he
was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of the
state of things, and a doctor--Surgeon J. M. Caffyn, of 33, East Elliot
Place--who came immediately after me, declared, after making
examination, that the man must have been dead for quite two days. In his
pocket was a bottle, carefully corked, empty save for a little roll of
paper, which proved to be the addendum to the log. The coastguard said
the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the knots with his
teeth. The fact that a coastguard was the first on board may save some
complications, later on, in the Admiralty Court; for coastguards cannot
claim the salvage which is the right of the first civilian entering on a
derelict. Already, however, the legal tongues are wagging, and one young
law student is loudly asserting that the rights of the owner are already
completely sacrificed, his property being held in contravention of the
statutes of mortmain, since the tiller, as emblemship, if not proof, of
delegated possession, is held in a _dead hand_. It is needless to say
that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place where
he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as
noble as that of the young Casabianca--and placed in the mortuary to
await inquest.

Already the sudden storm is passing, and its fierceness is abating;
crowds are scattering homeward, and the sky is beginning to redden over
the Yorkshire wolds. I shall send, in time for your next issue, further
details of the derelict ship which found her way so miraculously into
harbour in the storm.

_Whitby_

_9 August._--The sequel to the strange arrival of the derelict in the
storm last night is almost more startling than the thing itself. It
turns out that the schooner is a Russian from Varna, and is called the
_Demeter_. She is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with only a
small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould.
This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of
7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took
possession of the goods consigned to him. The Russian consul, too,
acting for the charter-party, took formal possession of the ship, and
paid all harbour dues, etc. Nothing is talked about here to-day except
the strange coincidence; the officials of the Board of Trade have been
most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been made with
existing regulations. As the matter is to be a "nine days' wonder," they
are evidently determined that there shall be no cause of after
complaint. A good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog which
landed when the ship struck, and more than a few of the members of the
S. P. C. A., which is very strong in Whitby, have tried to befriend the
animal. To the general disappointment, however, it was not to be found;
it seems to have disappeared entirely from the town. It may be that it
was frightened and made its way on to the moors, where it is still
hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a
possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it
is evidently a fierce brute. Early this morning a large dog, a half-bred
mastiff belonging to a coal merchant close to Tate Hill Pier, was found
dead in the roadway opposite to its master's yard. It had been fighting,
and manifestly had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away,
and its belly was slit open as if with a savage claw.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--By the kindness of the Board of Trade inspector, I have been
permitted to look over the log-book of the _Demeter_, which was in order
up to within three days, but contained nothing of special interest
except as to facts of missing men. The greatest interest, however, is
with regard to the paper found in the bottle, which was to-day produced
at the inquest; and a more strange narrative than the two between them
unfold it has not been my lot to come across. As there is no motive for
concealment, I am permitted to use them, and accordingly send you a
rescript, simply omitting technical details of seamanship and
supercargo. It almost seems as though the captain had been seized with
some kind of mania before he had got well into blue water, and that
this had developed persistently throughout the voyage. Of course my
statement must be taken _cum grano_, since I am writing from the
dictation of a clerk of the Russian consul, who kindly translated for
me, time being short.

                         LOG OF THE "DEMETER."


_Varna to Whitby._

_Written 18 July, things so strange happening, that I shall keep
accurate note henceforth till we land._

       *       *       *       *       *

On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth.
At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates,
cook, and myself (captain).

       *       *       *       *       *

On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs
officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p. m.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 12 July through Dardanelles. More Customs officers and flagboat of
guarding squadron. Backsheesh again. Work of officers thorough, but
quick. Want us off soon. At dark passed into Archipelago.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 13 July passed Cape Matapan. Crew dissatisfied about something.
Seemed scared, but would not speak out.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 14 July was somewhat anxious about crew. Men all steady fellows, who
sailed with me before. Mate could not make out what was wrong; they only
told him there was _something_, and crossed themselves. Mate lost temper
with one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but
all was quiet.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 16 July mate reported in the morning that one of crew, Petrofsky, was
missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last
night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not go to bunk. Men more
downcast than ever. All said they expected something of the kind, but
would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting very
impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 17 July, yesterday, one of the men, Olgaren, came to my cabin, and in
an awestruck way confided to me that he thought there was a strange man
aboard the ship. He said that in his watch he had been sheltering
behind the deck-house, as there was a rain-storm, when he saw a tall,
thin man, who was not like any of the crew, come up the companion-way,
and go along the deck forward, and disappear. He followed cautiously,
but when he got to bows found no one, and the hatchways were all closed.
He was in a panic of superstitious fear, and I am afraid the panic may
spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from
stem to stern.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later in the day I got together the whole crew, and told them, as they
evidently thought there was some one in the ship, we would search from
stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to such
foolish ideas would demoralise the men; said he would engage to keep
them out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while the
rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns: we left
no corner unsearched. As there were only the big wooden boxes, there
were no odd corners where a man could hide. Men much relieved when
search over, and went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but
said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_22 July_.--Rough weather last three days, and all hands busy with
sails--no time to be frightened. Men seem to have forgotten their dread.
Mate cheerful again, and all on good terms. Praised men for work in bad
weather. Passed Gibralter and out through Straits. All well.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 July_.--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short,
and entering on the Bay of Biscay with wild weather ahead, and yet last
night another man lost--disappeared. Like the first, he came off his
watch and was not seen again. Men all in a panic of fear; sent a round
robin, asking to have double watch, as they fear to be alone. Mate
angry. Fear there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do
some violence.

       *       *       *       *       *

_28 July_.--Four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of maelstrom,
and the wind a tempest. No sleep for any one. Men all worn out. Hardly
know how to set a watch, since no one fit to go on. Second mate
volunteered to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours' sleep.
Wind abating; seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is
steadier.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 July_.--Another tragedy. Had single watch to-night, as crew too
tired to double. When morning watch came on deck could find no one
except steersman. Raised outcry, and all came on deck. Thorough search,
but no one found. Are now without second mate, and crew in a panic. Mate
and I agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any sign of cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 July_.--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing England. Weather fine,
all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling
me that both man of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and
two hands left to work ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in
the English Channel to be able to signal for help or get in somewhere.
Not having power to work sails, have to run before wind. Dare not lower,
as could not raise them again. We seem to be drifting to some terrible
doom. Mate now more demoralised than either of men. His stronger nature
seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear,
working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are
Russian, he Roumanian.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 August, midnight_.--Woke up from few minutes' sleep by hearing a cry,
seemingly outside my port. Could see nothing in fog. Rushed on deck, and
ran against mate. Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign of man on
watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be past Straits
of Dover, as in a moment of fog lifting he saw North Foreland, just as
he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in the North Sea, and
only God can guide us in the fog, which seems to move with us; and God
seems to have deserted us.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 August_.--At midnight I went to relieve the man at the wheel, and
when I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we ran
before it there was no yawing. I dared not leave it, so shouted for the
mate. After a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flannels. He
looked wild-eyed and haggard, and I greatly fear his reason has given
way. He came close to me and whispered hoarsely, with his mouth to my
ear, as though fearing the very air might hear: "_It_ is here; I know
it, now. On the watch last night I saw It, like a man, tall and thin,
and ghastly pale. It was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind
It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the
air." And as he spoke he took his knife and drove it savagely into
space. Then he went on: "But It is here, and I'll find It. It is in the
hold, perhaps in one of those boxes. I'll unscrew them one by one and
see. You work the helm." And, with a warning look and his finger on his
lip, he went below. There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could
not leave the helm. I saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest
and a lantern, and go down the forward hatchway. He is mad, stark,
raving mad, and it's no use my trying to stop him. He can't hurt those
big boxes: they are invoiced as "clay," and to pull them about is as
harmless a thing as he can do. So here I stay, and mind the helm, and
write these notes. I can only trust in God and wait till the fog clears.
Then, if I can't steer to any harbour with the wind that is, I shall cut
down sails and lie by, and signal for help....

       *       *       *       *       *

It is nearly all over now. Just as I was beginning to hope that the mate
would come out calmer--for I heard him knocking away at something in the
hold, and work is good for him--there came up the hatchway a sudden,
startled scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he
came as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes rolling and
his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and then
looked round on the blanket of fog. His horror turned to despair, and in
a steady voice he said: "You had better come too, captain, before it is
too late. _He_ is there. I know the secret now. The sea will save me
from Him, and it is all that is left!" Before I could say a word, or
move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliberately
threw himself into the sea. I suppose I know the secret too, now. It was
this madman who had got rid of the men one by one, and now he has
followed them himself. God help me! How am I to account for all these
horrors when I get to port? _When_ I get to port! Will that ever be?

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 August._--Still fog, which the sunrise cannot pierce. I know there is
sunrise because I am a sailor, why else I know not. I dared not go
below, I dared not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in
the dimness of the night I saw It--Him! God forgive me, but the mate was
right to jump overboard. It was better to die like a man; to die like a
sailor in blue water no man can object. But I am captain, and I must not
leave my ship. But I shall baffle this fiend or monster, for I shall tie
my hands to the wheel when my strength begins to fail, and along with
them I shall tie that which He--It!--dare not touch; and then, come good
wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my honour as a captain. I am
growing weaker, and the night is coming on. If He can look me in the
face again, I may not have time to act.... If we are wrecked, mayhap
this bottle may be found, and those who find it may understand; if not,
... well, then all men shall know that I have been true to my trust. God
and the Blessed Virgin and the saints help a poor ignorant soul trying
to do his duty....

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no evidence to adduce;
and whether or not the man himself committed the murders there is now
none to say. The folk here hold almost universally that the captain is
simply a hero, and he is to be given a public funeral. Already it is
arranged that his body is to be taken with a train of boats up the Esk
for a piece and then brought back to Tate Hill Pier and up the abbey
steps; for he is to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. The owners
of more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as
wishing to follow him to the grave.

No trace has ever been found of the great dog; at which there is much
mourning, for, with public opinion in its present state, he would, I
believe, be adopted by the town. To-morrow will see the funeral; and so
will end this one more "mystery of the sea."


_Mina Murray's Journal._

_8 August._--Lucy was very restless all night, and I, too, could not
sleep. The storm was fearful, and as it boomed loudly among the
chimney-pots, it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to be
like a distant gun. Strangely enough, Lucy did not wake; but she got up
twice and dressed herself. Fortunately, each time I awoke in time and
managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It
is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as her will is
thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be any,
disappears, and she yields herself almost exactly to the routine of her
life.

Early in the morning we both got up and went down to the harbour to see
if anything had happened in the night. There were very few people about,
and though the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big,
grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that
topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the narrow mouth
of the harbour--like a bullying man going through a crowd. Somehow I
felt glad that Jonathan was not on the sea last night, but on land. But,
oh, is he on land or sea? Where is he, and how? I am getting fearfully
anxious about him. If I only knew what to do, and could do anything!

       *       *       *       *       *

_10 August._--The funeral of the poor sea-captain to-day was most
touching. Every boat in the harbour seemed to be there, and the coffin
was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the
churchyard. Lucy came with me, and we went early to our old seat, whilst
the cortège of boats went up the river to the Viaduct and came down
again. We had a lovely view, and saw the procession nearly all the way.
The poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we stood on
it when the time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed much upset.
She was restless and uneasy all the time, and I cannot but think that
her dreaming at night is telling on her. She is quite odd in one thing:
she will not admit to me that there is any cause for restlessness; or if
there be, she does not understand it herself. There is an additional
cause in that poor old Mr. Swales was found dead this morning on our
seat, his neck being broken. He had evidently, as the doctor said,
fallen back in the seat in some sort of fright, for there was a look of
fear and horror on his face that the men said made them shudder. Poor
dear old man! Perhaps he had seen Death with his dying eyes! Lucy is so
sweet and sensitive that she feels influences more acutely than other
people do. Just now she was quite upset by a little thing which I did
not much heed, though I am myself very fond of animals. One of the men
who came up here often to look for the boats was followed by his dog.
The dog is always with him. They are both quiet persons, and I never saw
the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. During the service the dog would
not come to its master, who was on the seat with us, but kept a few
yards off, barking and howling. Its master spoke to it gently, and then
harshly, and then angrily; but it would neither come nor cease to make a
noise. It was in a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs
bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the war-path. Finally
the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and kicked the dog, and then
took it by the scruff of the neck and half dragged and half threw it on
the tombstone on which the seat is fixed. The moment it touched the
stone the poor thing became quiet and fell all into a tremble. It did
not try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was
in such a pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect,
to comfort it. Lucy was full of pity, too, but she did not attempt to
touch the dog, but looked at it in an agonised sort of way. I greatly
fear that she is of too super-sensitive a nature to go through the world
without trouble. She will be dreaming of this to-night, I am sure. The
whole agglomeration of things--the ship steered into port by a dead
man; his attitude, tied to the wheel with a crucifix and beads; the
touching funeral; the dog, now furious and now in terror--will all
afford material for her dreams.

I think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out physically, so I
shall take her for a long walk by the cliffs to Robin Hood's Bay and
back. She ought not to have much inclination for sleep-walking then.




CHAPTER VIII

MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


_Same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--Oh, but I am tired! If it were not that I
had made my diary a duty I should not open it to-night. We had a lovely
walk. Lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, I think, to some
dear cows who came nosing towards us in a field close to the lighthouse,
and frightened the wits out of us. I believe we forgot everything
except, of course, personal fear, and it seemed to wipe the slate clean
and give us a fresh start. We had a capital "severe tea" at Robin Hood's
Bay in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over
the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. I believe we should have
shocked the "New Woman" with our appetites. Men are more tolerant, bless
them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest,
and with our hearts full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy was
really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as we could.
The young curate came in, however, and Mrs. Westenra asked him to stay
for supper. Lucy and I had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; I
know it was a hard fight on my part, and I am quite heroic. I think that
some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new
class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how they may be
pressed to, and who will know when girls are tired. Lucy is asleep and
breathing softly. She has more colour in her cheeks than usual, and
looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holmwood fell in love with her seeing her
only in the drawing-room, I wonder what he would say if he saw her now.
Some of the "New Women" writers will some day start an idea that men and
women should be allowed to see each other asleep before proposing or
accepting. But I suppose the New Woman won't condescend in future to
accept; she will do the proposing herself. And a nice job she will make
of it, too! There's some consolation in that. I am so happy to-night,
because dear Lucy seems better. I really believe she has turned the
corner, and that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be
quite happy if I only knew if Jonathan.... God bless and keep him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 August, 3 a. m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may as well write.
I am too agitated to sleep. We have had such an adventure, such an
agonising experience. I fell asleep as soon as I had closed my diary....
Suddenly I became broad awake, and sat up, with a horrible sense of fear
upon me, and of some feeling of emptiness around me. The room was dark,
so I could not see Lucy's bed; I stole across and felt for her. The bed
was empty. I lit a match and found that she was not in the room. The
door was shut, but not locked, as I had left it. I feared to wake her
mother, who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on some
clothes and got ready to look for her. As I was leaving the room it
struck me that the clothes she wore might give me some clue to her
dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside.
Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said
to myself, "she cannot be far, as she is only in her nightdress." I ran
downstairs and looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked in
all the other open rooms of the house, with an ever-growing fear
chilling my heart. Finally I came to the hall door and found it open. It
was not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught. The people
of the house are careful to lock the door every night, so I feared that
Lucy must have gone out as she was. There was no time to think of what
might happen; a vague, overmastering fear obscured all details. I took a
big, heavy shawl and ran out. The clock was striking one as I was in the
Crescent, and there was not a soul in sight. I ran along the North
Terrace, but could see no sign of the white figure which I expected. At
the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour to
the East Cliff, in the hope or fear--I don't know which--of seeing Lucy
in our favourite seat. There was a bright full moon, with heavy black,
driving clouds, which threw the whole scene into a fleeting diorama of
light and shade as they sailed across. For a moment or two I could see
nothing, as the shadow of a cloud obscured St. Mary's Church and all
around it. Then as the cloud passed I could see the ruins of the abbey
coming into view; and as the edge of a narrow band of light as sharp as
a sword-cut moved along, the church and the churchyard became gradually
visible. Whatever my expectation was, it was not disappointed, for
there, on our favourite seat, the silver light of the moon struck a
half-reclining figure, snowy white. The coming of the cloud was too
quick for me to see much, for shadow shut down on light almost
immediately; but it seemed to me as though something dark stood behind
the seat where the white figure shone, and bent over it. What it was,
whether man or beast, I could not tell; I did not wait to catch another
glance, but flew down the steep steps to the pier and along by the
fish-market to the bridge, which was the only way to reach the East
Cliff. The town seemed as dead, for not a soul did I see; I rejoiced
that it was so, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's condition. The
time and distance seemed endless, and my knees trembled and my breath
came laboured as I toiled up the endless steps to the abbey. I must have
gone fast, and yet it seemed to me as if my feet were weighted with
lead, and as though every joint in my body were rusty. When I got almost
to the top I could see the seat and the white figure, for I was now
close enough to distinguish it even through the spells of shadow. There
was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over the
half-reclining white figure. I called in fright, "Lucy! Lucy!" and
something raised a head, and from where I was I could see a white face
and red, gleaming eyes. Lucy did not answer, and I ran on to the
entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and
the seat, and for a minute or so I lost sight of her. When I came in
view again the cloud had passed, and the moonlight struck so brilliantly
that I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying over the back
of the seat. She was quite alone, and there was not a sign of any living
thing about.

When I bent over her I could see that she was still asleep. Her lips
were parted, and she was breathing--not softly as usual with her, but in
long, heavy gasps, as though striving to get her lungs full at every
breath. As I came close, she put up her hand in her sleep and pulled the
collar of her nightdress close around her throat. Whilst she did so
there came a little shudder through her, as though she felt the cold. I
flung the warm shawl over her, and drew the edges tight round her neck,
for I dreaded lest she should get some deadly chill from the night air,
unclad as she was. I feared to wake her all at once, so, in order to
have my hands free that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her
throat with a big safety-pin; but I must have been clumsy in my anxiety
and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her breathing
became quieter, she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I
had her carefully wrapped up I put my shoes on her feet and then began
very gently to wake her. At first she did not respond; but gradually she
became more and more uneasy in her sleep, moaning and sighing
occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other
reasons, I wished to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly,
till finally she opened her eyes and awoke. She did not seem surprised
to see me, as, of course, she did not realise all at once where she was.
Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such a time, when her body must
have been chilled with cold, and her mind somewhat appalled at waking
unclad in a churchyard at night, she did not lose her grace. She
trembled a little, and clung to me; when I told her to come at once with
me home she rose without a word, with the obedience of a child. As we
passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She
stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but I would not.
However, when we got to the pathway outside the churchyard, where there
was a puddle of water, remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet with
mud, using each foot in turn on the other, so that as we went home, no
one, in case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet.

Fortune favoured us, and we got home without meeting a soul. Once we saw
a man, who seemed not quite sober, passing along a street in front of
us; but we hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as
there are here, steep little closes, or "wynds," as they call them in
Scotland. My heart beat so loud all the time that sometimes I thought I
should faint. I was filled with anxiety about Lucy, not only for her
health, lest she should suffer from the exposure, but for her reputation
in case the story should get wind. When we got in, and had washed our
feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into
bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a
word to any one, even her mother, about her sleep-walking adventure. I
hesitated at first to promise; but on thinking of the state of her
mother's health, and how the knowledge of such a thing would fret her,
and thinking, too, of how such a story might become distorted--nay,
infallibly would--in case it should leak out, I thought it wiser to do
so. I hope I did right. I have locked the door, and the key is tied to
my wrist, so perhaps I shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is sleeping
soundly; the reflex of the dawn is high and far over the sea....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed
not to have even changed her side. The adventure of the night does not
seem to have harmed her; on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she
looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to
notice that my clumsiness with the safety-pin hurt her. Indeed, it might
have been serious, for the skin of her throat was pierced. I must have
pinched up a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for there are
two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the band of her nightdress
was a drop of blood. When I apologised and was concerned about it, she
laughed and petted me, and said she did not even feel it. Fortunately it
cannot leave a scar, as it is so tiny.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, night._--We passed a happy day. The air was clear, and the
sun bright, and there was a cool breeze. We took our lunch to Mulgrave
Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I walking by the
cliff-path and joining her at the gate. I felt a little sad myself, for
I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been had
Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only be patient. In the evening
we strolled in the Casino Terrace, and heard some good music by Spohr
and Mackenzie, and went to bed early. Lucy seems more restful than she
has been for some time, and fell asleep at once. I shall lock the door
and secure the key the same as before, though I do not expect any
trouble to-night.

       *       *       *       *       *

_12 August._--My expectations were wrong, for twice during the night I
was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. She seemed, even in her sleep, to
be a little impatient at finding the door shut, and went back to bed
under a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard the birds
chirping outside of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad to see,
was even better than on the previous morning. All her old gaiety of
manner seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in beside me
and told me all about Arthur. I told her how anxious I was about
Jonathan, and then she tried to comfort me. Well, she succeeded
somewhat, for, though sympathy can't alter facts, it can help to make
them more bearable.

       *       *       *       *       *

_13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as
before. Again I awoke in the night, and found Lucy sitting up in bed,
still asleep, pointing to the window. I got up quietly, and pulling
aside the blind, looked out. It was brilliant moonlight, and the soft
effect of the light over the sea and sky--merged together in one great,
silent mystery--was beautiful beyond words. Between me and the moonlight
flitted a great bat, coming and going in great whirling circles. Once or
twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me,
and flitted away across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came back
from the window Lucy had lain down again, and was sleeping peacefully.
She did not stir again all night.

       *       *       *       *       *

_14 August._--On the East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems
to have become as much in love with the spot as I am, and it is hard to
get her away from it when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or
dinner. This afternoon she made a funny remark. We were coming home for
dinner, and had come to the top of the steps up from the West Pier and
stopped to look at the view, as we generally do. The setting sun, low
down in the sky, was just dropping behind Kettleness; the red light was
thrown over on the East Cliff and the old abbey, and seemed to bathe
everything in a beautiful rosy glow. We were silent for a while, and
suddenly Lucy murmured as if to herself:--

"His red eyes again! They are just the same." It was such an odd
expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. I
slewed round a little, so as to see Lucy well without seeming to stare
at her, and saw that she was in a half-dreamy state, with an odd look on
her face that I could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but
followed her eyes. She appeared to be looking over at our own seat,
whereon was a dark figure seated alone. I was a little startled myself,
for it seemed for an instant as if the stranger had great eyes like
burning flames; but a second look dispelled the illusion. The red
sunlight was shining on the windows of St. Mary's Church behind our
seat, and as the sun dipped there was just sufficient change in the
refraction and reflection to make it appear as if the light moved. I
called Lucy's attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself
with a start, but she looked sad all the same; it may have been that she
was thinking of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I
said nothing, and we went home to dinner. Lucy had a headache and went
early to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out for a little stroll myself;
I walked along the cliffs to the westward, and was full of sweet
sadness, for I was thinking of Jonathan. When coming home--it was then
bright moonlight, so bright that, though the front of our part of the
Crescent was in shadow, everything could be well seen--I threw a glance
up at our window, and saw Lucy's head leaning out. I thought that
perhaps she was looking out for me, so I opened my handkerchief and
waved it. She did not notice or make any movement whatever. Just then,
the moonlight crept round an angle of the building, and the light fell
on the window. There distinctly was Lucy with her head lying up against
the side of the window-sill and her eyes shut. She was fast asleep, and
by her, seated on the window-sill, was something that looked like a
good-sized bird. I was afraid she might get a chill, so I ran upstairs,
but as I came into the room she was moving back to her bed, fast
asleep, and breathing heavily; she was holding her hand to her throat,
as though to protect it from cold.

I did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly; I have taken care that the
door is locked and the window securely fastened.

She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is paler than is her wont, and
there is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which I do not like. I
fear she is fretting about something. I wish I could find out what it
is.

       *       *       *       *       *

_15 August._--Rose later than usual. Lucy was languid and tired, and
slept on after we had been called. We had a happy surprise at breakfast.
Arthur's father is better, and wants the marriage to come off soon. Lucy
is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorry at once. Later on
in the day she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as her
very own, but she is rejoiced that she is soon to have some one to
protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that she has got
her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me promise secrecy;
her doctor told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for
her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be
almost sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair of
the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking.

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 August._--No diary for two whole days. I have not had the heart to
write. Some sort of shadowy pall seems to be coming over our happiness.
No news from Jonathan, and Lucy seems to be growing weaker, whilst her
mother's hours are numbering to a close. I do not understand Lucy's
fading away as she is doing. She eats well and sleeps well, and enjoys
the fresh air; but all the time the roses in her cheeks are fading, and
she gets weaker and more languid day by day; at night I hear her gasping
as if for air. I keep the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at
night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and sits at the open
window. Last night I found her leaning out when I woke up, and when I
tried to wake her I could not; she was in a faint. When I managed to
restore her she was as weak as water, and cried silently between long,
painful struggles for breath. When I asked her how she came to be at the
window she shook her head and turned away. I trust her feeling ill may
not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her throat
just now as she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds seem not to have healed.
They are still open, and, if anything, larger than before, and the
edges of them are faintly white. They are like little white dots with
red centres. Unless they heal within a day or two, I shall insist on the
doctor seeing about them.


_Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Solicitors, Whitby, to Messrs.
Carter, Paterson & Co., London._

"_17 August._

"Dear Sirs,--

"Herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by Great Northern
Railway. Same are to be delivered at Carfax, near Purfleet, immediately
on receipt at goods station King's Cross. The house is at present empty,
but enclosed please find keys, all of which are labelled.

"You will please deposit the boxes, fifty in number, which form the
consignment, in the partially ruined building forming part of the house
and marked 'A' on rough diagram enclosed. Your agent will easily
recognise the locality, as it is the ancient chapel of the mansion. The
goods leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be due at King's
Cross at 4:30 to-morrow afternoon. As our client wishes the delivery
made as soon as possible, we shall be obliged by your having teams ready
at King's Cross at the time named and forthwith conveying the goods to
destination. In order to obviate any delays possible through any routine
requirements as to payment in your departments, we enclose cheque
herewith for ten pounds (£10), receipt of which please acknowledge.
Should the charge be less than this amount, you can return balance; if
greater, we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from
you. You are to leave the keys on coming away in the main hall of the
house, where the proprietor may get them on his entering the house by
means of his duplicate key.

"Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy in
pressing you in all ways to use the utmost expedition.

_"We are, dear Sirs,

"Faithfully yours,

"SAMUEL F. BILLINGTON & SON."_


_Letter, Messrs. Carter, Paterson & Co., London, to Messrs. Billington &
Son, Whitby._

"_21 August._

"Dear Sirs,--

"We beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17s. 9d,
amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. Goods are
delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel
in main hall, as directed.

"We are, dear Sirs,

"Yours respectfully.

"_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO."


_Mina Murray's Journal._

_18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on the seat in the
churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept well all
night, and did not disturb me once. The roses seem coming back already
to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she
were in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is not. She is in
gay spirits and full of life and cheerfulness. All the morbid reticence
seems to have passed from her, and she has just reminded me, as if I
needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was here, on this
very seat, I found her asleep. As she told me she tapped playfully with
the heel of her boot on the stone slab and said:--

"My poor little feet didn't make much noise then! I daresay poor old Mr.
Swales would have told me that it was because I didn't want to wake up
Geordie." As she was in such a communicative humour, I asked her if she
had dreamed at all that night. Before she answered, that sweet, puckered
look came into her forehead, which Arthur--I call him Arthur from her
habit--says he loves; and, indeed, I don't wonder that he does. Then she
went on in a half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to recall it to
herself:--

"I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to be real. I only wanted to be
here in this spot--I don't know why, for I was afraid of something--I
don't know what. I remember, though I suppose I was asleep, passing
through the streets and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I went by, and
I leaned over to look at it, and I heard a lot of dogs howling--the
whole town seemed as if it must be full of dogs all howling at once--as
I went up the steps. Then I had a vague memory of something long and
dark with red eyes, just as we saw in the sunset, and something very
sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I seemed sinking
into deep green water, and there was a singing in my ears, as I have
heard there is to drowning men; and then everything seemed passing away
from me; my soul seemed to go out from my body and float about the air.
I seem to remember that once the West Lighthouse was right under me,
and then there was a sort of agonising feeling, as if I were in an
earthquake, and I came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you do
it before I felt you."

Then she began to laugh. It seemed a little uncanny to me, and I
listened to her breathlessly. I did not quite like it, and thought it
better not to keep her mind on the subject, so we drifted on to other
subjects, and Lucy was like her old self again. When we got home the
fresh breeze had braced her up, and her pale cheeks were really more
rosy. Her mother rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very
happy evening together.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 August._--Joy, joy, joy! although not all joy. At last, news of
Jonathan. The dear fellow has been ill; that is why he did not write. I
am not afraid to think it or say it, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent
me on the letter, and wrote himself, oh, so kindly. I am to leave in the
morning and go over to Jonathan, and to help to nurse him if necessary,
and to bring him home. Mr. Hawkins says it would not be a bad thing if
we were to be married out there. I have cried over the good Sister's
letter till I can feel it wet against my bosom, where it lies. It is of
Jonathan, and must be next my heart, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey
is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only taking one change of
dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep it till I send for
it, for it may be that ... I must write no more; I must keep it to say
to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has seen and touched must
comfort me till we meet.


_Letter, Sister Agatha, Hospital of St. Joseph and Ste. Mary,
Buda-Pesth, to Miss Wilhelmina Murray._

"_12 August._

"Dear Madam,--

"I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is himself not strong
enough to write, though progressing well, thanks to God and St. Joseph
and Ste. Mary. He has been under our care for nearly six weeks,
suffering from a violent brain fever. He wishes me to convey his love,
and to say that by this post I write for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins,
Exeter, to say, with his dutiful respects, that he is sorry for his
delay, and that all of his work is completed. He will require some few
weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. He
wishes me to say that he has not sufficient money with him, and that he
would like to pay for his staying here, so that others who need shall
not be wanting for help.

"Believe me,

"Yours, with sympathy and all blessings,

"SISTER AGATHA.

"P. S.--My patient being asleep, I open this to let you know something
more. He has told me all about you, and that you are shortly to be his
wife. All blessings to you both! He has had some fearful shock--so says
our doctor--and in his delirium his ravings have been dreadful; of
wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons; and I fear to say of
what. Be careful with him always that there may be nothing to excite him
of this kind for a long time to come; the traces of such an illness as
his do not lightly die away. We should have written long ago, but we
knew nothing of his friends, and there was on him nothing that any one
could understand. He came in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard
was told by the station-master there that he rushed into the station
shouting for a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that
he was English, they gave him a ticket for the furthest station on the
way thither that the train reached.

"Be assured that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his
sweetness and gentleness. He is truly getting on well, and I have no
doubt will in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of him for
safety's sake. There are, I pray God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many,
many, happy years for you both."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About
eight o'clock he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog does when
setting. The attendant was struck by his manner, and knowing my interest
in him, encouraged him to talk. He is usually respectful to the
attendant and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he was
quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with him at all. All he
would say was:--

     "I don't want to talk to you: you don't count now; the Master is at
     hand."

The attendant thinks it is some sudden form of religious mania which has
seized him. If so, we must look out for squalls, for a strong man with
homicidal and religious mania at once might be dangerous. The
combination is a dreadful one. At nine o'clock I visited him myself. His
attitude to me was the same as that to the attendant; in his sublime
self-feeling the difference between myself and attendant seemed to him
as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that
he himself is God. These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man
are too paltry for an Omnipotent Being. How these madmen give themselves
away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the God created
from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh,
if men only knew!

For half an hour or more Renfield kept getting excited in greater and
greater degree. I did not pretend to be watching him, but I kept strict
observation all the same. All at once that shifty look came into his
eyes which we always see when a madman has seized an idea, and with it
the shifty movement of the head and back which asylum attendants come to
know so well. He became quite quiet, and went and sat on the edge of his
bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought I
would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to
lead him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to excite
his attention. At first he made no reply, but at length said testily:--

"Bother them all! I don't care a pin about them."

"What?" I said. "You don't mean to tell me you don't care about
spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling
up with columns of small figures.) To this he answered enigmatically:--

"The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that wait the coming of the bride;
but when the bride draweth nigh, then the maidens shine not to the eyes
that are filled."

He would not explain himself, but remained obstinately seated on his bed
all the time I remained with him.

I am weary to-night and low in spirits. I cannot but think of Lucy, and
how different things might have been. If I don't sleep at once, chloral,
the modern Morpheus--C_{2}HCl_{3}O. H_{2}O! I must be careful not to let
it grow into a habit. No, I shall take none to-night! I have thought of
Lucy, and I shall not dishonour her by mixing the two. If need be,
to-night shall be sleepless....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Glad I made the resolution; gladder that I kept to it. I had
lain tossing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the
night-watchman came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that Renfield
had escaped. I threw on my clothes and ran down at once; my patient is
too dangerous a person to be roaming about. Those ideas of his might
work out dangerously with strangers. The attendant was waiting for me.
He said he had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his
bed, when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His
attention was called by the sound of the window being wrenched out. He
ran back and saw his feet disappear through the window, and had at once
sent up for me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off.
The attendant thought it would be more useful to watch where he should
go than to follow him, as he might lose sight of him whilst getting out
of the building by the door. He is a bulky man, and couldn't get through
the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost,
and, as we were only a few feet above ground, landed unhurt. The
attendant told me the patient had gone to the left, and had taken a
straight line, so I ran as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt
of trees I saw a white figure scale the high wall which separates our
grounds from those of the deserted house.

I ran back at once, told the watchman to get three or four men
immediately and follow me into the grounds of Carfax, in case our friend
might be dangerous. I got a ladder myself, and crossing the wall,
dropped down on the other side. I could see Renfield's figure just
disappearing behind the angle of the house, so I ran after him. On the
far side of the house I found him pressed close against the old
ironbound oak door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some
one, but I was afraid to go near enough to hear what he was saying, lest
I might frighten him, and he should run off. Chasing an errant swarm of
bees is nothing to following a naked lunatic, when the fit of escaping
is upon him! After a few minutes, however, I could see that he did not
take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to
him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him
in. I heard him say:--

"I am here to do Your bidding, Master. I am Your slave, and You will
reward me, for I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar
off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will not pass
me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?"

He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes
even when he believes he is in a Real Presence. His manias make a
startling combination. When we closed in on him he fought like a tiger.
He is immensely strong, for he was more like a wild beast than a man. I
never saw a lunatic in such a paroxysm of rage before; and I hope I
shall not again. It is a mercy that we have found out his strength and
his danger in good time. With strength and determination like his, he
might have done wild work before he was caged. He is safe now at any
rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn't get free from the strait-waistcoat
that keeps him restrained, and he's chained to the wall in the padded
room. His cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are
more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement.

Just now he spoke coherent words for the first time:--

"I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!"

So I took the hint, and came too. I was too excited to sleep, but this
diary has quieted me, and I feel I shall get some sleep to-night.




CHAPTER IX


_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

"_Buda-Pesth, 24 August._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"I know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we
parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, I got to Hull
all right, and caught the boat to Hamburg, and then the train on here. I
feel that I can hardly recall anything of the journey, except that I
knew I was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I should have to do some
nursing, I had better get all the sleep I could.... I found my dear one,
oh, so thin and pale and weak-looking. All the resolution has gone out
of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his
face has vanished. He is only a wreck of himself, and he does not
remember anything that has happened to him for a long time past. At
least, he wants me to believe so, and I shall never ask. He has had some
terrible shock, and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were to try
to recall it. Sister Agatha, who is a good creature and a born nurse,
tells me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I
wanted her to tell me what they were; but she would only cross herself,
and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the
secrets of God, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear
them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the
next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again,
and after saying that she could never mention what my poor dear raved
about, added: 'I can tell you this much, my dear: that it was not about
anything which he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be,
have no cause to be concerned. He has not forgotten you or what he owes
to you. His fear was of great and terrible things, which no mortal can
treat of.' I do believe the dear soul thought I might be jealous lest my
poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. The idea of
_my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I
felt a thrill of joy through me when I _knew_ that no other woman was a
cause of trouble. I am now sitting by his bedside, where I can see his
face while he sleeps. He is waking!...

"When he woke he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to get something
from the pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things.
I saw that amongst them was his note-book, and was going to ask him to
let me look at it--for I knew then that I might find some clue to his
trouble--but I suppose he must have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent
me over to the window, saying he wanted to be quite alone for a moment.
Then he called me back, and when I came he had his hand over the
note-book, and he said to me very solemnly:--

"'Wilhelmina'--I knew then that he was in deadly earnest, for he has
never called me by that name since he asked me to marry him--'you know,
dear, my ideas of the trust between husband and wife: there should be no
secret, no concealment. I have had a great shock, and when I try to
think of what it is I feel my head spin round, and I do not know if it
was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I have had brain
fever, and that is to be mad. The secret is here, and I do not want to
know it. I want to take up my life here, with our marriage.' For, my
dear, we had decided to be married as soon as the formalities are
complete. 'Are you willing, Wilhelmina, to share my ignorance? Here is
the book. Take it and keep it, read it if you will, but never let me
know; unless, indeed, some solemn duty should come upon me to go back to
the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell
back exhausted, and I put the book under his pillow, and kissed him. I
have asked Sister Agatha to beg the Superior to let our wedding be this
afternoon, and am waiting her reply....

       *       *       *       *       *

"She has come and told me that the chaplain of the English mission
church has been sent for. We are to be married in an hour, or as soon
after as Jonathan awakes....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Lucy, the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very
happy. Jonathan woke a little after the hour, and all was ready, and he
sat up in bed, propped up with pillows. He answered his 'I will' firmly
and strongly. I could hardly speak; my heart was so full that even those
words seemed to choke me. The dear sisters were so kind. Please God, I
shall never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet responsibilities
I have taken upon me. I must tell you of my wedding present. When the
chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband--oh, Lucy, it
is the first time I have written the words 'my husband'--left me alone
with my husband, I took the book from under his pillow, and wrapped it
up in white paper, and tied it with a little bit of pale blue ribbon
which was round my neck, and sealed it over the knot with sealing-wax,
and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it and showed it
to my husband, and told him that I would keep it so, and then it would
be an outward and visible sign for us all our lives that we trusted each
other; that I would never open it unless it were for his own dear sake
or for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took my hand in his, and oh,
Lucy, it was the first time he took _his wife's_ hand, and said that it
was the dearest thing in all the wide world, and that he would go
through all the past again to win it, if need be. The poor dear meant to
have said a part of the past, but he cannot think of time yet, and I
shall not wonder if at first he mixes up not only the month, but the
year.

"Well, my dear, what could I say? I could only tell him that I was the
happiest woman in all the wide world, and that I had nothing to give him
except myself, my life, and my trust, and that with these went my love
and duty for all the days of my life. And, my dear, when he kissed me,
and drew me to him with his poor weak hands, it was like a very solemn
pledge between us....

"Lucy dear, do you know why I tell you all this? It is not only because
it is all sweet to me, but because you have been, and are, very dear to
me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from
the schoolroom to prepare for the world of life. I want you to see now,
and with the eyes of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me; so that
in your own married life you too may be all happy as I am. My dear,
please Almighty God, your life may be all it promises: a long day of
sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must
not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope you will be
_always_ as happy as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at
once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan
is waking--I must attend to my husband!

"Your ever-loving

"MINA HARKER."


_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._

"_Whitby, 30 August._

"My dearest Mina,--

"Oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your own
home with your husband. I wish you could be coming home soon enough to
stay with us here. The strong air would soon restore Jonathan; it has
quite restored me. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of
life, and sleep well. You will be glad to know that I have quite given
up walking in my sleep. I think I have not stirred out of my bed for a
week, that is when I once got into it at night. Arthur says I am getting
fat. By the way, I forgot to tell you that Arthur is here. We have such
walks and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing
together; and I love him more than ever. He _tells_ me that he loves me
more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn't love me
more than he did then. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me.
So no more just at present from your loving

"LUCY.

"P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P.
S.--We are to be married on 28 September."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_20 August._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has
now so far quieted that there are spells of cessation from his passion.
For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. Then one
night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmuring to
himself: "Now I can wait; now I can wait." The attendant came to tell
me, so I ran down at once to have a look at him. He was still in the
strait-waistcoat and in the padded room, but the suffused look had gone
from his face, and his eyes had something of their old pleading--I might
almost say, "cringing"--softness. I was satisfied with his present
condition, and directed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated,
but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a strange
thing that the patient had humour enough to see their distrust, for,
coming close to me, he said in a whisper, all the while looking
furtively at them:--

"They think I could hurt you! Fancy _me_ hurting _you_! The fools!"

It was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find myself dissociated
even in the mind of this poor madman from the others; but all the same I
do not follow his thought. Am I to take it that I have anything in
common with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand together; or has
he to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well-being is needful
to him? I must find out later on. To-night he will not speak. Even the
offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt him. He will
only say: "I don't take any stock in cats. I have more to think of now,
and I can wait; I can wait."

After a while I left him. The attendant tells me that he was quiet
until just before dawn, and that then he began to get uneasy, and at
length violent, until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhausted
him so that he swooned into a sort of coma.

       *       *       *       *       *

... Three nights has the same thing happened--violent all day then quiet
from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could get some clue to the cause. It
would almost seem as if there was some influence which came and went.
Happy thought! We shall to-night play sane wits against mad ones. He
escaped before without our help; to-night he shall escape with it. We
shall give him a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case they
are required....

       *       *       *       *       *

_23 August._--"The unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew
life. Our bird when he found the cage open would not fly, so all our
subtle arrangements were for nought. At any rate, we have proved one
thing; that the spells of quietness last a reasonable time. We shall in
future be able to ease his bonds for a few hours each day. I have given
orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the padded room,
when once he is quiet, until an hour before sunrise. The poor soul's
body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it. Hark!
The unexpected again! I am called; the patient has once more escaped.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the
attendant was entering the room to inspect. Then he dashed out past him
and flew down the passage. I sent word for the attendants to follow.
Again he went into the grounds of the deserted house, and we found him
in the same place, pressed against the old chapel door. When he saw me
he became furious, and had not the attendants seized him in time, he
would have tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing
happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as suddenly grew
calm. I looked round instinctively, but could see nothing. Then I caught
the patient's eye and followed it, but could trace nothing as it looked
into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and
ghostly way to the west. Bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one
seemed to go straight on, as if it knew where it was bound for or had
some intention of its own. The patient grew calmer every instant, and
presently said:--

"You needn't tie me; I shall go quietly!" Without trouble we came back
to the house. I feel there is something ominous in his calm, and shall
not forget this night....


_Lucy Westenra's Diary_

_Hillingham, 24 August._--I must imitate Mina, and keep writing things
down. Then we can have long talks when we do meet. I wonder when it will
be. I wish she were with me again, for I feel so unhappy. Last night I
seemed to be dreaming again just as I was at Whitby. Perhaps it is the
change of air, or getting home again. It is all dark and horrid to me,
for I can remember nothing; but I am full of vague fear, and I feel so
weak and worn out. When Arthur came to lunch he looked quite grieved
when he saw me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to be cheerful. I wonder
if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make an excuse and
try.

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 August._--Another bad night. Mother did not seem to take to my
proposal. She seems not too well herself, and doubtless she fears to
worry me. I tried to keep awake, and succeeded for a while; but when the
clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze, so I must have been falling
asleep. There was a sort of scratching or flapping at the window, but I
did not mind it, and as I remember no more, I suppose I must then have
fallen asleep. More bad dreams. I wish I could remember them. This
morning I am horribly weak. My face is ghastly pale, and my throat pains
me. It must be something wrong with my lungs, for I don't seem ever to
get air enough. I shall try to cheer up when Arthur comes, or else I
know he will be miserable to see me so.


_Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._

"_Albemarle Hotel, 31 August._

"My dear Jack,--

"I want you to do me a favour. Lucy is ill; that is, she has no special
disease, but she looks awful, and is getting worse every day. I have
asked her if there is any cause; I do not dare to ask her mother, for to
disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of
health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that her doom is
spoken--disease of the heart--though poor Lucy does not know it yet. I
am sure that there is something preying on my dear girl's mind. I am
almost distracted when I think of her; to look at her gives me a pang. I
told her I should ask you to see her, and though she demurred at
first--I know why, old fellow--she finally consented. It will be a
painful task for you, I know, old friend, but it is for _her_ sake, and
I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to come to lunch at
Hillingham to-morrow, two o'clock, so as not to arouse any suspicion in
Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of being
alone with you. I shall come in for tea, and we can go away together; I
am filled with anxiety, and want to consult with you alone as soon as I
can after you have seen her. Do not fail!

"ARTHUR."


_Telegram, Arthur Holmwood to Seward._

"_1 September._

"Am summoned to see my father, who is worse. Am writing. Write me fully
by to-night's post to Ring. Wire me if necessary."


_Letter from Dr. Seward to Arthur Holmwood._

"_2 September._

"My dear old fellow,--

"With regard to Miss Westenra's health I hasten to let you know at once
that in my opinion there is not any functional disturbance or any malady
that I know of. At the same time, I am not by any means satisfied with
her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was when I saw
her last. Of course you must bear in mind that I did not have full
opportunity of examination such as I should wish; our very friendship
makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can
bridge over. I had better tell you exactly what happened, leaving you to
draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. I shall then say what I have
done and propose doing.

"I found Miss Westenra in seemingly gay spirits. Her mother was present,
and in a few seconds I made up my mind that she was trying all she knew
to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. I have no
doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution there is.
We lunched alone, and as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful, we
got, as some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheerfulness
amongst us. Then Mrs. Westenra went to lie down, and Lucy was left with
me. We went into her boudoir, and till we got there her gaiety remained,
for the servants were coming and going. As soon as the door was closed,
however, the mask fell from her face, and she sank down into a chair
with a great sigh, and hid her eyes with her hand. When I saw that her
high spirits had failed, I at once took advantage of her reaction to
make a diagnosis. She said to me very sweetly:--

"'I cannot tell you how I loathe talking about myself.' I reminded her
that a doctor's confidence was sacred, but that you were grievously
anxious about her. She caught on to my meaning at once, and settled that
matter in a word. 'Tell Arthur everything you choose. I do not care for
myself, but all for him!' So I am quite free.

"I could easily see that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could not see
the usual anæmic signs, and by a chance I was actually able to test the
quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was stiff a cord
gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. It was a
slight matter in itself, but it gave me an evident chance, and I secured
a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. The qualitative
analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in
itself a vigorous state of health. In other physical matters I was quite
satisfied that there is no need for anxiety; but as there must be a
cause somewhere, I have come to the conclusion that it must be something
mental. She complains of difficulty in breathing satisfactorily at
times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but
regarding which she can remember nothing. She says that as a child she
used to walk in her sleep, and that when in Whitby the habit came back,
and that once she walked out in the night and went to East Cliff, where
Miss Murray found her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not
returned. I am in doubt, and so have done the best thing I know of; I
have written to my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, of
Amsterdam, who knows as much about obscure diseases as any one in the
world. I have asked him to come over, and as you told me that all things
were to be at your charge, I have mentioned to him who you are and your
relations to Miss Westenra. This, my dear fellow, is in obedience to
your wishes, for I am only too proud and happy to do anything I can for
her. Van Helsing would, I know, do anything for me for a personal
reason, so, no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept his
wishes. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is because he knows
what he is talking about better than any one else. He is a philosopher
and a metaphysician, and one of the most advanced scientists of his day;
and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron
nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution,
self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the
kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the
noble work that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and
practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. I
tell you these facts that you may know why I have such confidence in
him. I have asked him to come at once. I shall see Miss Westenra
to-morrow again. She is to meet me at the Stores, so that I may not
alarm her mother by too early a repetition of my call.

"Yours always,

"JOHN SEWARD."


_Letter, Abraham Van Helsing, M. D., D. Ph., D. Lit., etc., etc., to Dr.
Seward._

"_2 September._

"My good Friend,--

"When I have received your letter I am already coming to you. By good
fortune I can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who have
trusted me. Were fortune other, then it were bad for those who have
trusted, for I come to my friend when he call me to aid those he holds
dear. Tell your friend that when that time you suck from my wound so
swiftly the poison of the gangrene from that knife that our other
friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he wants my
aids and you call for them than all his great fortune could do. But it
is pleasure added to do for him, your friend; it is to you that I come.
Have then rooms for me at the Great Eastern Hotel, so that I may be near
to hand, and please it so arrange that we may see the young lady not too
late on to-morrow, for it is likely that I may have to return here that
night. But if need be I shall come again in three days, and stay longer
if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John.

 "VAN HELSING."


_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

"_3 September._

"My dear Art,--

"Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to Hillingham, and
found that, by Lucy's discretion, her mother was lunching out, so that
we were alone with her. Van Helsing made a very careful examination of
the patient. He is to report to me, and I shall advise you, for of
course I was not present all the time. He is, I fear, much concerned,
but says he must think. When I told him of our friendship and how you
trust to me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all you think.
Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, I am not
jesting. This is no jest, but life and death, perhaps more.' I asked
what he meant by that, for he was very serious. This was when we had
come back to town, and he was having a cup of tea before starting on his
return to Amsterdam. He would not give me any further clue. You must not
be angry with me, Art, because his very reticence means that all his
brains are working for her good. He will speak plainly enough when the
time comes, be sure. So I told him I would simply write an account of
our visit, just as if I were doing a descriptive special article for
_The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, but remarked that the
smuts in London were not quite so bad as they used to be when he was a
student here. I am to get his report to-morrow if he can possibly make
it. In any case I am to have a letter.

"Well, as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day I first
saw her, and certainly looked better. She had lost something of the
ghastly look that so upset you, and her breathing was normal. She was
very sweet to the professor (as she always is), and tried to make him
feel at ease; though I could see that the poor girl was making a hard
struggle for it. I believe Van Helsing saw it, too, for I saw the quick
look under his bushy brows that I knew of old. Then he began to chat of
all things except ourselves and diseases and with such an infinite
geniality that I could see poor Lucy's pretense of animation merge into
reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation
gently round to his visit, and suavely said:--

"'My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are so
much beloved. That is much, my dear, ever were there that which I do not
see. They told me you were down in the spirit, and that you were of a
ghastly pale. To them I say: "Pouf!"' And he snapped his fingers at me
and went on: 'But you and I shall show them how wrong they are. How can
he'--and he pointed at me with the same look and gesture as that with
which once he pointed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a
particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--'know anything
of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and to bring them
back to happiness, and to those that love them. It is much to do, and,
oh, but there are rewards, in that we can bestow such happiness. But the
young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young do not tell
themselves to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known so many
sorrows and the causes of them. So, my dear, we will send him away to
smoke the cigarette in the garden, whiles you and I have little talk all
to ourselves.' I took the hint, and strolled about, and presently the
professor came to the window and called me in. He looked grave, but
said: 'I have made careful examination, but there is no functional
cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood lost; it has
been, but is not. But the conditions of her are in no way anæmic. I have
asked her to send me her maid, that I may ask just one or two question,
that so I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well what she will say.
And yet there is cause; there is always cause for everything. I must go
back home and think. You must send to me the telegram every day; and if
there be cause I shall come again. The disease--for not to be all well
is a disease--interest me, and the sweet young dear, she interest me
too. She charm me, and for her, if not for you or disease, I come.'

"As I tell you, he would not say a word more, even when we were alone.
And so now, Art, you know all I know. I shall keep stern watch. I trust
your poor father is rallying. It must be a terrible thing to you, my
dear old fellow, to be placed in such a position between two people who
are both so dear to you. I know your idea of duty to your father, and
you are right to stick to it; but, if need be, I shall send you word to
come at once to Lucy; so do not be over-anxious unless you hear from
me."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_4 September._--Zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him.
He had only one outburst and that was yesterday at an unusual time. Just
before the stroke of noon he began to grow restless. The attendant knew
the symptoms, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a
run, and were just in time, for at the stroke of noon he became so
violent that it took all their strength to hold him. In about five
minutes, however, he began to get more and more quiet, and finally sank
into a sort of melancholy, in which state he has remained up to now. The
attendant tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were really
appalling; I found my hands full when I got in, attending to some of the
other patients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite
understand the effect, for the sounds disturbed even me, though I was
some distance away. It is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum, and
as yet my patient sits in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen,
woe-begone look in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show
something directly. I cannot quite understand it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Another change in my patient. At five o'clock I looked in on
him, and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used to be. He
was catching flies and eating them, and was keeping note of his capture
by making nail-marks on the edge of the door between the ridges of
padding. When he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad
conduct, and asked me in a very humble, cringing way to be led back to
his own room and to have his note-book again. I thought it well to
humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. He has the
sugar of his tea spread out on the window-sill, and is reaping quite a
harvest of flies. He is not now eating them, but putting them into a
box, as of old, and is already examining the corners of his room to find
a spider. I tried to get him to talk about the past few days, for any
clue to his thoughts would be of immense help to me; but he would not
rise. For a moment or two he looked very sad, and said in a sort of
far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:--

"All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do
it for myself!" Then suddenly turning to me in a resolute way, he said:
"Doctor, won't you be very good to me and let me have a little more
sugar? I think it would be good for me."

"And the flies?" I said.

"Yes! The flies like it, too, and I like the flies; therefore I like
it." And there are people who know so little as to think that madmen do
not argue. I procured him a double supply, and left him as happy a man
as, I suppose, any in the world. I wish I could fathom his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Midnight._--Another change in him. I had been to see Miss Westenra,
whom I found much better, and had just returned, and was standing at our
own gate looking at the sunset, when once more I heard him yelling. As
his room is on this side of the house, I could hear it better than in
the morning. It was a shock to me to turn from the wonderful smoky
beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows
and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul
water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own cold stone
building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own desolate heart
to endure it all. I reached him just as the sun was going down, and from
his window saw the red disc sink. As it sank he became less and less
frenzied; and just as it dipped he slid from the hands that held him, an
inert mass, on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual
recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes he stood up
quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to the attendants not to
hold him, for I was anxious to see what he would do. He went straight
over to the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his
fly-box, and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut
the window, and crossing over, sat down on his bed. All this surprised
me, so I asked him: "Are you not going to keep flies any more?"

"No," said he; "I am sick of all that rubbish!" He certainly is a
wonderfully interesting study. I wish I could get some glimpse of his
mind or of the cause of his sudden passion. Stop; there may be a clue
after all, if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon
and at sunset. Can it be that there is a malign influence of the sun at
periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others?
We shall see.


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._

"_4 September._--Patient still better to-day."


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._

"_5 September._--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite; sleeps
naturally; good spirits; colour coming back."


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._

"_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not
lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you."




CHAPTER X


_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

"_6 September._

"My dear Art,--

"My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit.
There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; Mrs.
Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted me
professionally about her. I took advantage of the opportunity, and told
her that my old master, Van Helsing, the great specialist, was coming to
stay with me, and that I would put her in his charge conjointly with
myself; so now we can come and go without alarming her unduly, for a
shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak
condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with
difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall
come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you
do not hear from me, take it for granted that I am simply waiting for
news. In haste

Yours ever,

"JOHN SEWARD."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_7 September._--The first thing Van Helsing said to me when we met at
Liverpool Street was:--

"Have you said anything to our young friend the lover of her?"

"No," I said. "I waited till I had seen you, as I said in my telegram. I
wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were coming, as Miss
Westenra was not so well, and that I should let him know if need be."

"Right, my friend," he said, "quite right! Better he not know as yet;
perhaps he shall never know. I pray so; but if it be needed, then he
shall know all. And, my good friend John, let me caution you. You deal
with the madmen. All men are mad in some way or the other; and inasmuch
as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen,
too--the rest of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why
you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge
in its place, where it may rest--where it may gather its kind around it
and breed. You and I shall keep as yet what we know here, and here." He
touched me on the heart and on the forehead, and then touched himself
the same way. "I have for myself thoughts at the present. Later I shall
unfold to you."

"Why not now?" I asked. "It may do some good; we may arrive at some
decision." He stopped and looked at me, and said:--

"My friend John, when the corn is grown, even before it has
ripened--while the milk of its mother-earth is in him, and the sunshine
has not yet begun to paint him with his gold, the husbandman he pull the
ear and rub him between his rough hands, and blow away the green chaff,
and say to you: 'Look! he's good corn; he will make good crop when the
time comes.'" I did not see the application, and told him so. For reply
he reached over and took my ear in his hand and pulled it playfully, as
he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell
you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not find the
good husbandman dig up his planted corn to see if he grow; that is for
the children who play at husbandry, and not for those who take it as of
the work of their life. See you now, friend John? I have sown my corn,
and Nature has her work to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all,
there's some promise; and I wait till the ear begins to swell." He broke
off, for he evidently saw that I understood. Then he went on, and very
gravely:--

"You were always a careful student, and your case-book was ever more
full than the rest. You were only student then; now you are master, and
I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that
knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not trust the weaker.
Even if you have not kept the good practise, let me tell you that this
case of our dear miss is one that may be--mind, I say _may be_--of such
interest to us and others that all the rest may not make him kick the
beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too
small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises.
Hereafter it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess. We
learn from failure, not from success!"

When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, but infinitely
more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. He took with him a
bag in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia
of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of his lectures, the
equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were shown in,
Mrs. Westenra met us. She was alarmed, but not nearly so much as I
expected to find her. Nature in one of her beneficent moods has ordained
that even death has some antidote to its own terrors. Here, in a case
where any shock may prove fatal, matters are so ordered that, from some
cause or other, the things not personal--even the terrible change in her
daughter to whom she is so attached--do not seem to reach her. It is
something like the way Dame Nature gathers round a foreign body an
envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that
which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered
selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the vice
of egoism, for there may be deeper root for its causes than we have
knowledge of.

I used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down
a rule that she should not be present with Lucy or think of her illness
more than was absolutely required. She assented readily, so readily that
I saw again the hand of Nature fighting for life. Van Helsing and I were
shown up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw her yesterday, I
was horrified when I saw her to-day. She was ghastly, chalkily pale; the
red seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and the bones of
her face stood out prominently; her breathing was painful to see or
hear. Van Helsing's face grew set as marble, and his eyebrows converged
till they almost touched over his nose. Lucy lay motionless, and did not
seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all silent. Then
Van Helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of the room. The
instant we had closed the door he stepped quickly along the passage to
the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and
closed the door. "My God!" he said; "this is dreadful. There is no time
to be lost. She will die for sheer want of blood to keep the heart's
action as it should be. There must be transfusion of blood at once. Is
it you or me?"

"I am younger and stronger, Professor. It must be me."

"Then get ready at once. I will bring up my bag. I am prepared."

I went downstairs with him, and as we were going there was a knock at
the hall-door. When we reached the hall the maid had just opened the
door, and Arthur was stepping quickly in. He rushed up to me, saying in
an eager whisper:--

"Jack, I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your letter, and
have been in an agony. The dad was better, so I ran down here to see for
myself. Is not that gentleman Dr. Van Helsing? I am so thankful to you,
sir, for coming." When first the Professor's eye had lit upon him he had
been angry at his interruption at such a time; but now, as he took in
his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which
seemed to emanate from him, his eyes gleamed. Without a pause he said to
him gravely as he held out his hand:--

"Sir, you have come in time. You are the lover of our dear miss. She is
bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go like that." For he
suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting. "You are to
help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your
best help."

"What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me, and I shall do it. My
life is hers, and I would give the last drop of blood in my body for
her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could from old
knowledge detect a trace of its origin in his answer:--

"My young sir, I do not ask so much as that--not the last!"

"What shall I do?" There was fire in his eyes, and his open nostril
quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the shoulder. "Come!"
he said. "You are a man, and it is a man we want. You are better than
me, better than my friend John." Arthur looked bewildered, and the
Professor went on by explaining in a kindly way:--

"Young miss is bad, very bad. She wants blood, and blood she must have
or die. My friend John and I have consulted; and we are about to perform
what we call transfusion of blood--to transfer from full veins of one to
the empty veins which pine for him. John was to give his blood, as he is
the more young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand and wrung
it hard in silence--"but, now you are here, you are more good than us,
old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. Our nerves are not
so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!" Arthur turned to him
and said:--

"If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you would
understand----"

He stopped, with a sort of choke in his voice.

"Good boy!" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be happy
that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be silent. You
shall kiss her once before it is done, but then you must go; and you
must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with
her! There must be no shock; any knowledge of this would be one. Come!"

We all went up to Lucy's room. Arthur by direction remained outside.
Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing. She was not
asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the effort. Her eyes spoke
to us; that was all. Van Helsing took some things from his bag and laid
them on a little table out of sight. Then he mixed a narcotic, and
coming over to the bed, said cheerily:--

"Now, little miss, here is your medicine. Drink it off, like a good
child. See, I lift you so that to swallow is easy. Yes." She had made
the effort with success.

It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked
the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to
flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, the narcotic began to manifest
its potency; and she fell into a deep sleep. When the Professor was
satisfied he called Arthur into the room, and bade him strip off his
coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring
over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us looked whilst
he bent over her.

Van Helsing turning to me, said:

"He is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not
defibrinate it."

Then with swiftness, but with absolute method, Van Helsing performed the
operation. As the transfusion went on something like life seemed to come
back to poor Lucy's cheeks, and through Arthur's growing pallor the joy
of his face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to grow
anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he
was. It gave me an idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must
have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her.
But the Professor's face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with
his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear my own
heart beat. Presently he said in a soft voice: "Do not stir an instant.
It is enough. You attend him; I will look to her." When all was over I
could see how much Arthur was weakened. I dressed the wound and took his
arm to bring him away, when Van Helsing spoke without turning round--the
man seems to have eyes in the back of his head:--

"The brave lover, I think, deserve another kiss, which he shall have
presently." And as he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the
pillow to the patient's head. As he did so the narrow black velvet band
which she seems always to wear round her throat, buckled with an old
diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up,
and showed a red mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice it, but I
could hear the deep hiss of indrawn breath which is one of Van Helsing's
ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, but turned to
me, saying: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port
wine, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest, sleep
much and eat much, that he may be recruited of what he has so given to
his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I may take it, sir,
that you are anxious of result. Then bring it with you that in all ways
the operation is successful. You have saved her life this time, and you
can go home and rest easy in mind that all that can be is. I shall tell
her all when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you
have done. Good-bye."

When Arthur had gone I went back to the room. Lucy was sleeping gently,
but her breathing was stronger; I could see the counterpane move as her
breast heaved. By the bedside sat Van Helsing, looking at her intently.
The velvet band again covered the red mark. I asked the Professor in a
whisper:--

"What do you make of that mark on her throat?"

"What do you make of it?"

"I have not examined it yet," I answered, and then and there proceeded
to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two
punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. There was no sign of
disease, but the edges were white and worn-looking, as if by some
trituration. It at once occurred to me that this wound, or whatever it
was, might be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned
the idea as soon as formed, for such a thing could not be. The whole bed
would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which the girl must
have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion.

"Well?" said Van Helsing.

"Well," said I, "I can make nothing of it." The Professor stood up. "I
must go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and
things there which I want. You must remain here all the night, and you
must not let your sight pass from her."

"Shall I have a nurse?" I asked.

"We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that
she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not sleep all
the night. Later on we can sleep, you and I. I shall be back as soon as
possible. And then we may begin."

"May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?"

"We shall see!" he answered, as he hurried out. He came back a moment
later and put his head inside the door and said with warning finger held
up:--

"Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and harm befall, you
shall not sleep easy hereafter!"


_Dr. Seward's Diary--continued._

_8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked itself
off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being
from what she had been before the operation. Her spirits even were good,
and she was full of a happy vivacity, but I could see evidences of the
absolute prostration which she had undergone. When I told Mrs. Westenra
that Dr. Van Helsing had directed that I should sit up with her she
almost pooh-poohed the idea, pointing out her daughter's renewed
strength and excellent spirits. I was firm, however, and made
preparations for my long vigil. When her maid had prepared her for the
night I came in, having in the meantime had supper, and took a seat by
the bedside. She did not in any way make objection, but looked at me
gratefully whenever I caught her eye. After a long spell she seemed
sinking off to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together
and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort
and with shorter pauses as the time moved on. It was apparent that she
did not want to sleep, so I tackled the subject at once:--

"You do not want to go to sleep?"

"No; I am afraid."

"Afraid to go to sleep! Why so? It is the boon we all crave for."

"Ah, not if you were like me--if sleep was to you a presage of horror!"

"A presage of horror! What on earth do you mean?"

"I don't know; oh, I don't know. And that is what is so terrible. All
this weakness comes to me in sleep; until I dread the very thought."

"But, my dear girl, you may sleep to-night. I am here watching you, and
I can promise that nothing will happen."

"Ah, I can trust you!" I seized the opportunity, and said: "I promise
you that if I see any evidence of bad dreams I will wake you at once."

"You will? Oh, will you really? How good you are to me. Then I will
sleep!" And almost at the word she gave a deep sigh of relief, and sank
back, asleep.

All night long I watched by her. She never stirred, but slept on and on
in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. Her lips were
slightly parted, and her breast rose and fell with the regularity of a
pendulum. There was a smile on her face, and it was evident that no bad
dreams had come to disturb her peace of mind.

In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her care and took
myself back home, for I was anxious about many things. I sent a short
wire to Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result
of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all
day to clear off; it was dark when I was able to inquire about my
zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been quite quiet for the
past day and night. A telegram came from Van Helsing at Amsterdam whilst
I was at dinner, suggesting that I should be at Hillingham to-night, as
it might be well to be at hand, and stating that he was leaving by the
night mail and would join me early in the morning.

       *       *       *       *       *

_9 September_.--I was pretty tired and worn out when I got to
Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my
brain was beginning to feel that numbness which marks cerebral
exhaustion. Lucy was up and in cheerful spirits. When she shook hands
with me she looked sharply in my face and said:--

"No sitting up to-night for you. You are worn out. I am quite well
again; indeed, I am; and if there is to be any sitting up, it is I who
will sit up with you." I would not argue the point, but went and had my
supper. Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence, I
made an excellent meal, and had a couple of glasses of the more than
excellent port. Then Lucy took me upstairs, and showed me a room next
her own, where a cozy fire was burning. "Now," she said, "you must stay
here. I shall leave this door open and my door too. You can lie on the
sofa for I know that nothing would induce any of you doctors to go to
bed whilst there is a patient above the horizon. If I want anything I
shall call out, and you can come to me at once." I could not but
acquiesce, for I was "dog-tired," and could not have sat up had I tried.
So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything,
I lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything.


_Lucy Westenra's Diary._

_9 September._--I feel so happy to-night. I have been so miserably weak,
that to be able to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after
a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very,
very close to me. I seem to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose
it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our inner
eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give Love
rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know
where my thoughts are. If Arthur only knew! My dear, my dear, your ears
must tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking. Oh, the blissful rest of
last night! How I slept, with that dear, good Dr. Seward watching me.
And to-night I shall not fear to sleep, since he is close at hand and
within call. Thank everybody for being so good to me! Thank God!
Good-night, Arthur.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_10 September._--I was conscious of the Professor's hand on my head, and
started awake all in a second. That is one of the things that we learn
in an asylum, at any rate.

"And how is our patient?"

"Well, when I left her, or rather when she left me," I answered.

"Come, let us see," he said. And together we went into the room.

The blind was down, and I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van
Helsing stepped, with his soft, cat-like tread, over to the bed.

As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I
heard the Professor's low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a
deadly fear shot through my heart. As I passed over he moved back, and
his exclamation of horror, "Gott in Himmel!" needed no enforcement from
his agonised face. He raised his hand and pointed to the bed, and his
iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my knees begin to tremble.

There on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly
white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were white, and the gums
seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, as we sometimes see in a
corpse after a prolonged illness. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp
in anger, but the instinct of his life and all the long years of habit
stood to him, and he put it down again softly. "Quick!" he said. "Bring
the brandy." I flew to the dining-room, and returned with the decanter.
He wetted the poor white lips with it, and together we rubbed palm and
wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and after a few moments of agonising
suspense said:--

"It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is
undone; we must begin again. There is no young Arthur here now; I have
to call on you yourself this time, friend John." As he spoke, he was
dipping into his bag and producing the instruments for transfusion; I
had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no
possibility of an opiate just at present, and no need of one; and so,
without a moment's delay, we began the operation. After a time--it did
not seem a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood, no
matter how willingly it be given, is a terrible feeling--Van Helsing
held up a warning finger. "Do not stir," he said, "but I fear that with
growing strength she may wake; and that would make danger, oh, so much
danger. But I shall precaution take. I shall give hypodermic injection
of morphia." He proceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his
intent. The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge
subtly into the narcotic sleep. It was with a feeling of personal pride
that I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid
cheeks and lips. No man knows, till he experiences it, what it is to
feel his own life-blood drawn away into the veins of the woman he loves.

The Professor watched me critically. "That will do," he said. "Already?"
I remonstrated. "You took a great deal more from Art." To which he
smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied:--

"He is her lover, her _fiancé_. You have work, much work, to do for her
and for others; and the present will suffice."

When we stopped the operation, he attended to Lucy, whilst I applied
digital pressure to my own incision. I laid down, whilst I waited his
leisure to attend to me, for I felt faint and a little sick. By-and-by
he bound up my wound, and sent me downstairs to get a glass of wine for
myself. As I was leaving the room, he came after me, and half
whispered:--

"Mind, nothing must be said of this. If our young lover should turn up
unexpected, as before, no word to him. It would at once frighten him and
enjealous him, too. There must be none. So!"

When I came back he looked at me carefully, and then said:--

"You are not much the worse. Go into the room, and lie on your sofa, and
rest awhile; then have much breakfast, and come here to me."

I followed out his orders, for I knew how right and wise they were. I
had done my part, and now my next duty was to keep up my strength. I
felt very weak, and in the weakness lost something of the amazement at
what had occurred. I fell asleep on the sofa, however, wondering over
and over again how Lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and how
she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to
show for it. I think I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for,
sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the little
punctures in her throat and the ragged, exhausted appearance of their
edges--tiny though they were.

Lucy slept well into the day, and when she woke she was fairly well and
strong, though not nearly so much so as the day before. When Van Helsing
had seen her, he went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict
injunctions that I was not to leave her for a moment. I could hear his
voice in the hall, asking the way to the nearest telegraph office.

Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything
had happened. I tried to keep her amused and interested. When her mother
came up to see her, she did not seem to notice any change whatever, but
said to me gratefully:--

"We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really
must now take care not to overwork yourself. You are looking pale
yourself. You want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit; that you
do!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was only momentarily,
for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted
drain to the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned
imploring eyes on me. I smiled and nodded, and laid my finger on my
lips; with a sigh, she sank back amid her pillows.

Van Helsing returned in a couple of hours, and presently said to me:
"Now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. Make yourself strong. I
stay here to-night, and I shall sit up with little miss myself. You and
I must watch the case, and we must have none other to know. I have grave
reasons. No, do not ask them; think what you will. Do not fear to think
even the most not-probable. Good-night."

In the hall two of the maids came to me, and asked if they or either of
them might not sit up with Miss Lucy. They implored me to let them; and
when I said it was Dr. Van Helsing's wish that either he or I should sit
up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the "foreign
gentleman." I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is because
I am weak at present, and perhaps because it was on Lucy's account, that
their devotion was manifested; for over and over again have I seen
similar instances of woman's kindness. I got back here in time for a
late dinner; went my rounds--all well; and set this down whilst waiting
for sleep. It is coming.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 September._--This afternoon I went over to Hillingham. Found Van
Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much better. Shortly after I had
arrived, a big parcel from abroad came for the Professor. He opened it
with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of
white flowers.

"These are for you, Miss Lucy," he said.

"For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!"

"Yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. These are medicines." Here
Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are not to take in a decoction or
in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall
point out to my friend Arthur what woes he may have to endure in seeing
so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. Aha, my pretty miss,
that bring the so nice nose all straight again. This is medicinal, but
you do not know how. I put him in your window, I make pretty wreath, and
hang him round your neck, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the
lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. It smell so like the waters
of Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores sought
for in the Floridas, and find him all too late."

Whilst he was speaking, Lucy had been examining the flowers and smelling
them. Now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and
half-disgust:--

"Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me. Why,
these flowers are only common garlic."

To my surprise, Van Helsing rose up and said with all his sternness, his
iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows meeting:--

"No trifling with me! I never jest! There is grim purpose in all I do;
and I warn you that you do not thwart me. Take care, for the sake of
others if not for your own." Then seeing poor Lucy scared, as she might
well be, he went on more gently: "Oh, little miss, my dear, do not fear
me. I only do for your good; but there is much virtue to you in those so
common flowers. See, I place them myself in your room. I make myself the
wreath that you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so
inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of obedience;
and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait
for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, and you shall
help me deck the room with my garlic, which is all the way from Haarlem,
where my friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year.
I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would not have been here."

We went into the room, taking the flowers with us. The Professor's
actions were certainly odd and not to be found in any pharmacopoeia
that I ever heard of. First he fastened up the windows and latched them
securely; next, taking a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over
the sashes, as though to ensure that every whiff of air that might get
in would be laden with the garlic smell. Then with the wisp he rubbed
all over the jamb of the door, above, below, and at each side, and round
the fireplace in the same way. It all seemed grotesque to me, and
presently I said:--

"Well, Professor, I know you always have a reason for what you do, but
this certainly puzzles me. It is well we have no sceptic here, or he
would say that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit."

"Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to make the wreath which
Lucy was to wear round her neck.

We then waited whilst Lucy made her toilet for the night, and when she
was in bed he came and himself fixed the wreath of garlic round her
neck. The last words he said to her were:--

"Take care you do not disturb it; and even if the room feel close, do
not to-night open the window or the door."

"I promise," said Lucy, "and thank you both a thousand times for all
your kindness to me! Oh, what have I done to be blessed with such
friends?"

As we left the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:--

"To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel,
much reading in the day between, and much anxiety on the day to follow,
and a night to sit up, without to wink. To-morrow in the morning early
you call for me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much
more strong for my 'spell' which I have work. Ho! ho!"

He seemed so confident that I, remembering my own confidence two nights
before and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must
have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but
I felt it all the more, like unshed tears.




CHAPTER XI

_Lucy Westenra's Diary._


_12 September._--How good they all are to me. I quite love that dear Dr.
Van Helsing. I wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers. He
positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have been
right, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not dread
being alone to-night, and I can go to sleep without fear. I shall not
mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I
have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of the sleeplessness,
or the pain of the fear of sleep, with such unknown horrors as it has
for me! How blessed are some people, whose lives have no fears, no
dreads; to whom sleep is a blessing that comes nightly, and brings
nothing but sweet dreams. Well, here I am to-night, hoping for sleep,
and lying like Ophelia in the play, with "virgin crants and maiden
strewments." I never liked garlic before, but to-night it is delightful!
There is peace in its smell; I feel sleep coming already. Good-night,
everybody.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing, as usual,
up to time. The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. The
Professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now.

Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I arrived at Hillingham at
eight o'clock. It was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the
fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of nature's
annual work. The leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours,
but had not yet begun to drop from the trees. When we entered we met
Mrs. Westenra coming out of the morning room. She is always an early
riser. She greeted us warmly and said:--

"You will be glad to know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still
asleep. I looked into her room and saw her, but did not go in, lest I
should disturb her." The Professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant. He
rubbed his hands together, and said:--

"Aha! I thought I had diagnosed the case. My treatment is working," to
which she answered:--

"You must not take all the credit to yourself, doctor. Lucy's state this
morning is due in part to me."

"How you do mean, ma'am?" asked the Professor.

"Well, I was anxious about the dear child in the night, and went into
her room. She was sleeping soundly--so soundly that even my coming did
not wake her. But the room was awfully stuffy. There were a lot of those
horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually
a bunch of them round her neck. I feared that the heavy odour would be
too much for the dear child in her weak state, so I took them all away
and opened a bit of the window to let in a little fresh air. You will be
pleased with her, I am sure."

She moved off into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early. As
she had spoken, I watched the Professor's face, and saw it turn ashen
grey. He had been able to retain his self-command whilst the poor lady
was present, for he knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be;
he actually smiled on her as he held open the door for her to pass into
her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and
forcibly, into the dining-room and closed the door.

Then, for the first time in my life, I saw Van Helsing break down. He
raised his hands over his head in a sort of mute despair, and then beat
his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down on a chair,
and putting his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs
that seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. Then he raised
his arms again, as though appealing to the whole universe. "God! God!
God!" he said. "What have we done, what has this poor thing done, that
we are so sore beset? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the
pagan world of old, that such things must be, and in such way? This poor
mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such
thing as lose her daughter body and soul; and we must not tell her, we
must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are
beset! How are all the powers of the devils against us!" Suddenly he
jumped to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils
or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him
all the same." He went to the hall-door for his bag; and together we
went up to Lucy's room.

Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went towards the bed.
This time he did not start as he looked on the poor face with the same
awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of stern sadness and
infinite pity.

"As I expected," he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his which
meant so much. Without a word he went and locked the door, and then
began to set out on the little table the instruments for yet another
operation of transfusion of blood. I had long ago recognised the
necessity, and begun to take off my coat, but he stopped me with a
warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide.
You are weakened already." As he spoke he took off his coat and rolled
up his shirt-sleeve.

Again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to
the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I
watched whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested.

Presently he took an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must
not remove anything from Lucy's room without consulting him; that the
flowers were of medicinal value, and that the breathing of their odour
was a part of the system of cure. Then he took over the care of the case
himself, saying that he would watch this night and the next and would
send me word when to come.

After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and
seemingly not much the worse for her terrible ordeal.

What does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life
amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon my own brain.


_Lucy Westenra's Diary._

_17 September._--Four days and nights of peace. I am getting so strong
again that I hardly know myself. It is as if I had passed through some
long nightmare, and had just awakened to see the beautiful sunshine and
feel the fresh air of the morning around me. I have a dim
half-remembrance of long, anxious times of waiting and fearing; darkness
in which there was not even the pain of hope to make present distress
more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back to
life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since,
however, Dr. Van Helsing has been with me, all this bad dreaming seems
to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of my
wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed
so close to me, the harsh sounds that came from I know not where and
commanded me to do I know not what--have all ceased. I go to bed now
without any fear of sleep. I do not even try to keep awake. I have grown
quite fond of the garlic, and a boxful arrives for me every day from
Haarlem. To-night Dr. Van Helsing is going away, as he has to be for a
day in Amsterdam. But I need not be watched; I am well enough to be left
alone. Thank God for mother's sake, and dear Arthur's, and for all our
friends who have been so kind! I shall not even feel the change, for
last night Dr. Van Helsing slept in his chair a lot of the time. I found
him asleep twice when I awoke; but I did not fear to go to sleep again,
although the boughs or bats or something napped almost angrily against
the window-panes.


_"The Pall Mall Gazette," 18 September._

                           THE ESCAPED WOLF.

         PERILOUS ADVENTURE OF OUR INTERVIEWER.

         _Interview with the Keeper in the Zoölogical Gardens._

After many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and perpetually using
the words "Pall Mall Gazette" as a sort of talisman, I managed to find
the keeper of the section of the Zoölogical Gardens in which the wolf
department is included. Thomas Bilder lives in one of the cottages in
the enclosure behind the elephant-house, and was just sitting down to
his tea when I found him. Thomas and his wife are hospitable folk,
elderly, and without children, and if the specimen I enjoyed of their
hospitality be of the average kind, their lives must be pretty
comfortable. The keeper would not enter on what he called "business"
until the supper was over, and we were all satisfied. Then when the
table was cleared, and he had lit his pipe, he said:--

"Now, sir, you can go on and arsk me what you want. You'll excoose me
refoosin' to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the
wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore
I begins to arsk them questions."

"How do you mean, ask them questions?" I queried, wishful to get him
into a talkative humour.

"'Ittin' of them over the 'ead with a pole is one way; scratchin' of
their hears is another, when gents as is flush wants a bit of a show-orf
to their gals. I don't so much mind the fust--the 'ittin' with a pole
afore I chucks in their dinner; but I waits till they've 'ad their
sherry and kawffee, so to speak, afore I tries on with the
ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a deal of
the same nature in us as in them theer animiles. Here's you a-comin' and
arskin' of me questions about my business, and I that grumpy-like that
only for your bloomin' 'arf-quid I'd 'a' seen you blowed fust 'fore I'd
answer. Not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if I'd like you to
arsk the Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without offence
did I tell yer to go to 'ell?"

"You did."

"An' when you said you'd report me for usin' of obscene language that
was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I
weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for the food, and did with my 'owl
as the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now
that the old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an' rinsed
me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch
my ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me.
Drive along with your questions. I know what yer a-comin' at, that 'ere
escaped wolf."

"Exactly. I want you to give me your view of it. Just tell me how it
happened; and when I know the facts I'll get you to say what you
consider was the cause of it, and how you think the whole affair will
end."

"All right, guv'nor. This 'ere is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf
what we called Bersicker was one of three grey ones that came from
Norway to Jamrach's, which we bought off him four years ago. He was a
nice well-behaved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of. I'm more
surprised at 'im for wantin' to get out nor any other animile in the
place. But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor women."

"Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's
got mindin' the animiles so long that blest if he ain't like a old wolf
'isself! But there ain't no 'arm in 'im."

"Well, sir, it was about two hours after feedin' yesterday when I first
hear my disturbance. I was makin' up a litter in the monkey-house for a
young puma which is ill; but when I heard the yelpin' and 'owlin' I kem
away straight. There was Bersicker a-tearin' like a mad thing at the
bars as if he wanted to get out. There wasn't much people about that
day, and close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin chap, with a 'ook
nose and a pointed beard, with a few white hairs runnin' through it. He
had a 'ard, cold look and red eyes, and I took a sort of mislike to him,
for it seemed as if it was 'im as they was hirritated at. He 'ad white
kid gloves on 'is 'ands, and he pointed out the animiles to me and says:
'Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.'

"'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not like the airs as he give
'isself. He didn't git angry, as I 'oped he would, but he smiled a kind
of insolent smile, with a mouth full of white, sharp teeth. 'Oh no, they
wouldn't like me,' 'e says.

"'Ow yes, they would,' says I, a-imitatin' of him. 'They always likes a
bone or two to clean their teeth on about tea-time, which you 'as a
bagful.'

"Well, it was a odd thing, but when the animiles see us a-talkin' they
lay down, and when I went over to Bersicker he let me stroke his ears
same as ever. That there man kem over, and blessed but if he didn't put
in his hand and stroke the old wolf's ears too!

"'Tyke care,' says I. 'Bersicker is quick.'

"'Never mind,' he says. 'I'm used to 'em!'

"'Are you in the business yourself?' I says, tyking off my 'at, for a
man what trades in wolves, anceterer, is a good friend to keepers.

"'No' says he, 'not exactly in the business, but I 'ave made pets of
several.' And with that he lifts his 'at as perlite as a lord, and walks
away. Old Bersicker kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e was out of sight,
and then went and lay down in a corner and wouldn't come hout the 'ole
hevening. Well, larst night, so soon as the moon was hup, the wolves
here all began a-'owling. There warn't nothing for them to 'owl at.
There warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a
dog somewheres out back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice
I went out to see that all was right, and it was, and then the 'owling
stopped. Just before twelve o'clock I just took a look round afore
turnin' in, an', bust me, but when I kem opposite to old Bersicker's
cage I see the rails broken and twisted about and the cage empty. And
that's all I know for certing."

"Did any one else see anything?"

"One of our gard'ners was a-comin' 'ome about that time from a 'armony,
when he sees a big grey dog comin' out through the garding 'edges. At
least, so he says, but I don't give much for it myself, for if he did 'e
never said a word about it to his missis when 'e got 'ome, and it was
only after the escape of the wolf was made known, and we had been up all
night-a-huntin' of the Park for Bersicker, that he remembered seein'
anything. My own belief was that the 'armony 'ad got into his 'ead."

"Now, Mr. Bilder, can you account in any way for the escape of the
wolf?"

"Well, sir," he said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can;
but I don't know as 'ow you'd be satisfied with the theory."

"Certainly I shall. If a man like you, who knows the animals from
experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, who is even to try?"

"Well then, sir, I accounts for it this way; it seems to me that 'ere
wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to get out."

From the hearty way that both Thomas and his wife laughed at the joke I
could see that it had done service before, and that the whole
explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage
with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I knew a surer way to his heart,
so I said:--

"Now, Mr. Bilder, we'll consider that first half-sovereign worked off,
and this brother of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me
what you think will happen."

"Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for
a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman here winked at me, which was as much
as telling me to go on."

"Well, I never!" said the old lady.

"My opinion is this: that 'ere wolf is a-'idin' of, somewheres. The
gard'ner wot didn't remember said he was a-gallopin' northward faster
than a horse could go; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir,
wolves don't gallop no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that
way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets
in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is
they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But,
Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a low creature, not half so
clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in
'im. This one ain't been used to fightin' or even to providin' for
hisself, and more like he's somewhere round the Park a-'idin' an'
a-shiverin' of, and, if he thinks at all, wonderin' where he is to get
his breakfast from; or maybe he's got down some area and is in a
coal-cellar. My eye, won't some cook get a rum start when she sees his
green eyes a-shining at her out of the dark! If he can't get food he's
bound to look for it, and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher's
shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin' orf with
a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I
shouldn't be surprised if the census is one babby the less. That's
all."

I was handing him the half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up
against the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length
with surprise.

"God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by
'isself!"

He went to the door and opened it; a most unnecessary proceeding it
seemed to me. I have always thought that a wild animal never looks so
well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a
personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea.

After all, however, there is nothing like custom, for neither Bilder nor
his wife thought any more of the wolf than I should of a dog. The animal
itself was as peaceful and well-behaved as that father of all
picture-wolves--Red Riding Hood's quondam friend, whilst moving her
confidence in masquerade.

The whole scene was an unutterable mixture of comedy and pathos. The
wicked wolf that for half a day had paralysed London and set all the
children in the town shivering in their shoes, was there in a sort of
penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of vulpine
prodigal son. Old Bilder examined him all over with most tender
solicitude, and when he had finished with his penitent said:--

"There, I knew the poor old chap would get into some kind of trouble;
didn't I say it all along? Here's his head all cut and full of broken
glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a
shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles.
This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker."

He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece of meat that
satisfied, in quantity at any rate, the elementary conditions of the
fatted calf, and went off to report.

I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given
to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my
books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy,
had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was burst open, and in
rushed my patient, with his face distorted with passion. I was
thunderstruck, for such a thing as a patient getting of his own accord
into the Superintendent's study is almost unknown. Without an instant's
pause he made straight at me. He had a dinner-knife in his hand, and,
as I saw he was dangerous, I tried to keep the table between us. He was
too quick and too strong for me, however; for before I could get my
balance he had struck at me and cut my left wrist rather severely.
Before he could strike again, however, I got in my right and he was
sprawling on his back on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quite a
little pool trickled on to the carpet. I saw that my friend was not
intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist,
keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. When the
attendants rushed in, and we turned our attention to him, his employment
positively sickened me. He was lying on his belly on the floor licking
up, like a dog, the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was
easily secured, and, to my surprise, went with the attendants quite
placidly, simply repeating over and over again: "The blood is the life!
The blood is the life!"

I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost too much of
late for my physical good, and then the prolonged strain of Lucy's
illness and its horrible phases is telling on me. I am over-excited and
weary, and I need rest, rest, rest. Happily Van Helsing has not summoned
me, so I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not well do without
it.


_Telegram, Van Helsing, Antwerp, to Seward, Carfax._

(Sent to Carfax, Sussex, as no county given; delivered late by
twenty-two hours.)

"_17 September._--Do not fail to be at Hillingham to-night. If not
watching all the time frequently, visit and see that flowers are as
placed; very important; do not fail. Shall be with you as soon as
possible after arrival."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_18 September._--Just off for train to London. The arrival of Van
Helsing's telegram filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know
by bitter experience what may happen in a night. Of course it is
possible that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely
there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident
should thwart us in all we try to do. I shall take this cylinder with
me, and then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph.


_Memorandum left by Lucy Westenra._

_17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be seen, so that no
one may by any chance get into trouble through me. This is an exact
record of what took place to-night. I feel I am dying of weakness, and
have barely strength to write, but it must be done if I die in the
doing.

I went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as Dr.
Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.

I was waked by the flapping at the window, which had begun after that
sleep-walking on the cliff at Whitby when Mina saved me, and which now I
know so well. I was not afraid, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was in
the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing said he would be--so that I might have
called him. I tried to go to sleep, but could not. Then there came to me
the old fear of sleep, and I determined to keep awake. Perversely sleep
would try to come then when I did not want it; so, as I feared to be
alone, I opened my door and called out: "Is there anybody there?" There
was no answer. I was afraid to wake mother, and so closed my door again.
Then outside in the shrubbery I heard a sort of howl like a dog's, but
more fierce and deeper. I went to the window and looked out, but could
see nothing, except a big bat, which had evidently been buffeting its
wings against the window. So I went back to bed again, but determined
not to go to sleep. Presently the door opened, and mother looked in;
seeing by my moving that I was not asleep, came in, and sat by me. She
said to me even more sweetly and softly than her wont:--

"I was uneasy about you, darling, and came in to see that you were all
right."

I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come in
and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down beside me; she did
not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only stay a while
and then go back to her own bed. As she lay there in my arms, and I in
hers, the flapping and buffeting came to the window again. She was
startled and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I tried
to pacify her, and at last succeeded, and she lay quiet; but I could
hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. After a while there was
the low howl again out in the shrubbery, and shortly after there was a
crash at the window, and a lot of broken glass was hurled on the floor.
The window blind blew back with the wind that rushed in, and in the
aperture of the broken panes there was the head of a great, gaunt grey
wolf. Mother cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a sitting
posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would help her. Amongst
other things, she clutched the wreath of flowers that Dr. Van Helsing
insisted on my wearing round my neck, and tore it away from me. For a
second or two she sat up, pointing at the wolf, and there was a strange
and horrible gurgling in her throat; then she fell over--as if struck
with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and made me dizzy for a
moment or two. The room and all round seemed to spin round. I kept my
eyes fixed on the window, but the wolf drew his head back, and a whole
myriad of little specks seemed to come blowing in through the broken
window, and wheeling and circling round like the pillar of dust that
travellers describe when there is a simoon in the desert. I tried to
stir, but there was some spell upon me, and dear mother's poor body,
which seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to
beat--weighed me down; and I remembered no more for a while.

The time did not seem long, but very, very awful, till I recovered
consciousness again. Somewhere near, a passing bell was tolling; the
dogs all round the neighbourhood were howling; and in our shrubbery,
seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and
stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of the
nightingale seemed like the voice of my dead mother come back to comfort
me. The sounds seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could hear
their bare feet pattering outside my door. I called to them, and they
came in, and when they saw what had happened, and what it was that lay
over me on the bed, they screamed out. The wind rushed in through the
broken window, and the door slammed to. They lifted off the body of my
dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the bed after I
had got up. They were all so frightened and nervous that I directed them
to go to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine. The door flew
open for an instant and closed again. The maids shrieked, and then went
in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear
mother's breast. When they were there I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing
had told me, but I didn't like to remove them, and, besides, I would
have some of the servants to sit up with me now. I was surprised that
the maids did not come back. I called them, but got no answer, so I went
to the dining-room to look for them.

My heart sank when I saw what had happened. They all four lay helpless
on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the table
half full, but there was a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious,
and examined the decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and looking on the
sideboard, I found that the bottle which mother's doctor uses for
her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? what am I to do? I am back
in the room with mother. I cannot leave her, and I am alone, save for
the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead! I
dare not go out, for I can hear the low howl of the wolf through the
broken window.

The air seems full of specks, floating and circling in the draught from
the window, and the lights burn blue and dim. What am I to do? God
shield me from harm this night! I shall hide this paper in my breast,
where they shall find it when they come to lay me out. My dear mother
gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should not
survive this night. God keep you, dear, and God help me!




CHAPTER XII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_18 September._--I drove at once to Hillingham and arrived early.
Keeping my cab at the gate, I went up the avenue alone. I knocked gently
and rang as quietly as possible, for I feared to disturb Lucy or her
mother, and hoped to only bring a servant to the door. After a while,
finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer. I cursed
the laziness of the servants that they should lie abed at such an
hour--for it was now ten o'clock--and so rang and knocked again, but
more impatiently, but still without response. Hitherto I had blamed only
the servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this
desolation but another link in the chain of doom which seemed drawing
tight around us? Was it indeed a house of death to which I had come, too
late? I knew that minutes, even seconds of delay, might mean hours of
danger to Lucy, if she had had again one of those frightful relapses;
and I went round the house to try if I could find by chance an entry
anywhere.

I could find no means of ingress. Every window and door was fastened and
locked, and I returned baffled to the porch. As I did so, I heard the
rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse's feet. They stopped at the
gate, and a few seconds later I met Van Helsing running up the avenue.
When he saw me, he gasped out:--

"Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you
not get my telegram?"

I answered as quickly and coherently as I could that I had only got his
telegram early in the morning, and had not lost a minute in coming here,
and that I could not make any one in the house hear me. He paused and
raised his hat as he said solemnly:--

"Then I fear we are too late. God's will be done!" With his usual
recuperative energy, he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get
in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now."

We went round to the back of the house, where there was a kitchen
window. The Professor took a small surgical saw from his case, and
handing it to me, pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. I
attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then
with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and
opened the window. I helped the Professor in, and followed him. There
was no one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which were close at
hand. We tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the dining-room,
dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four
servant-women lying on the floor. There was no need to think them dead,
for their stertorous breathing and the acrid smell of laudanum in the
room left no doubt as to their condition. Van Helsing and I looked at
each other, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later."
Then we ascended to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we paused at the
door to listen, but there was no sound that we could hear. With white
faces and trembling hands, we opened the door gently, and entered the
room.

How shall I describe what we saw? On the bed lay two women, Lucy and her
mother. The latter lay farthest in, and she was covered with a white
sheet, the edge of which had been blown back by the draught through the
broken window, showing the drawn, white face, with a look of terror
fixed upon it. By her side lay Lucy, with face white and still more
drawn. The flowers which had been round her neck we found upon her
mother's bosom, and her throat was bare, showing the two little wounds
which we had noticed before, but looking horribly white and mangled.
Without a word the Professor bent over the bed, his head almost touching
poor Lucy's breast; then he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one who
listens, and leaping to his feet, he cried out to me:--

"It is not yet too late! Quick! quick! Bring the brandy!"

I flew downstairs and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste
it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry which I found
on the table. The maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and I
fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. I did not stay to make sure,
but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another
occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her
hands. He said to me:--

"I can do this, all that can be at the present. You go wake those maids.
Flick them in the face with a wet towel, and flick them hard. Make them
get heat and fire and a warm bath. This poor soul is nearly as cold as
that beside her. She will need be heated before we can do anything
more."

I went at once, and found little difficulty in waking three of the
women. The fourth was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently
affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa and let her
sleep. The others were dazed at first, but as remembrance came back to
them they cried and sobbed in a hysterical manner. I was stern with
them, however, and would not let them talk. I told them that one life
was bad enough to lose, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice
Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad
as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and
boiler fires were still alive, and there was no lack of hot water. We
got a bath and carried Lucy out as she was and placed her in it. Whilst
we were busy chafing her limbs there was a knock at the hall door. One
of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it. Then
she returned and whispered to us that there was a gentleman who had come
with a message from Mr. Holmwood. I bade her simply tell him that he
must wait, for we could see no one now. She went away with the message,
and, engrossed with our work, I clean forgot all about him.

I never saw in all my experience the Professor work in such deadly
earnest. I knew--as he knew--that it was a stand-up fight with death,
and in a pause told him so. He answered me in a way that I did not
understand, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:--

"If that were all, I would stop here where we are now, and let her fade
away into peace, for I see no light in life over her horizon." He went
on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour.

Presently we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to
be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the
stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's
face almost beamed, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in
a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:--

"The first gain is ours! Check to the King!"

We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been prepared, and laid
her in bed and forced a few drops of brandy down her throat. I noticed
that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was
still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had
ever seen her.

Van Helsing called in one of the women, and told her to stay with her
and not to take her eyes off her till we returned, and then beckoned me
out of the room.

"We must consult as to what is to be done," he said as we descended the
stairs. In the hall he opened the dining-room door, and we passed in, he
closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but
the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of
death which the British woman of the lower classes always rigidly
observes. The room was, therefore, dimly dark. It was, however, light
enough for our purposes. Van Helsing's sternness was somewhat relieved
by a look of perplexity. He was evidently torturing his mind about
something, so I waited for an instant, and he spoke:--

"What are we to do now? Where are we to turn for help? We must have
another transfusion of blood, and that soon, or that poor girl's life
won't be worth an hour's purchase. You are exhausted already; I am
exhausted too. I fear to trust those women, even if they would have
courage to submit. What are we to do for some one who will open his
veins for her?"

"What's the matter with me, anyhow?"

The voice came from the sofa across the room, and its tones brought
relief and joy to my heart, for they were those of Quincey Morris. Van
Helsing started angrily at the first sound, but his face softened and a
glad look came into his eyes as I cried out: "Quincey Morris!" and
rushed towards him with outstretched hands.

"What brought you here?" I cried as our hands met.

"I guess Art is the cause."

He handed me a telegram:--

"Have not heard from Seward for three days, and am terribly anxious.
Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is.
Do not delay.--HOLMWOOD."

"I think I came just in the nick of time. You know you have only to tell
me what to do."

Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, looking him straight in
the eyes as he said:--

"A brave man's blood is the best thing on this earth when a woman is in
trouble. You're a man and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against
us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want them."

Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not the heart
to go through with the details. Lucy had got a terrible shock and it
told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her
veins, her body did not respond to the treatment as well as on the other
occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see
and hear. However, the action of both heart and lungs improved, and Van
Helsing made a subcutaneous injection of morphia, as before, and with
good effect. Her faint became a profound slumber. The Professor watched
whilst I went downstairs with Quincey Morris, and sent one of the maids
to pay off one of the cabmen who were waiting. I left Quincey lying down
after having a glass of wine, and told the cook to get ready a good
breakfast. Then a thought struck me, and I went back to the room where
Lucy now was. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing with a sheet or
two of note-paper in his hand. He had evidently read it, and was
thinking it over as he sat with his hand to his brow. There was a look
of grim satisfaction in his face, as of one who has had a doubt solved.
He handed me the paper saying only: "It dropped from Lucy's breast when
we carried her to the bath."

When I had read it, I stood looking at the Professor, and after a pause
asked him: "In God's name, what does it all mean? Was she, or is she,
mad; or what sort of horrible danger is it?" I was so bewildered that I
did not know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his hand and took the
paper, saying:--

"Do not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You shall know
and understand it all in good time; but it will be later. And now what
is it that you came to me to say?" This brought me back to fact, and I
was all myself again.

"I came to speak about the certificate of death. If we do not act
properly and wisely, there may be an inquest, and that paper would have
to be produced. I am in hopes that we need have no inquest, for if we
had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you
know, and the other doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westenra
had disease of the heart, and we can certify that she died of it. Let us
fill up the certificate at once, and I shall take it myself to the
registrar and go on to the undertaker."

"Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be
sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends that
love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old
man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not blind! I love you all the
more for it! Now go."

In the hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for Arthur telling him
that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now
going on better; and that Van Helsing and I were with her. I told him
where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I was going said:--

"When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to
ourselves?" I nodded in reply and went out. I found no difficulty about
the registration, and arranged with the local undertaker to come up in
the evening to measure for the coffin and to make arrangements.

When I got back Quincey was waiting for me. I told him I would see him
as soon as I knew about Lucy, and went up to her room. She was still
sleeping, and the Professor seemingly had not moved from his seat at her
side. From his putting his finger to his lips, I gathered that he
expected her to wake before long and was afraid of forestalling nature.
So I went down to Quincey and took him into the breakfast-room, where
the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little more cheerful, or
rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. When we were alone, he said
to me:--

"Jack Seward, I don't want to shove myself in anywhere where I've no
right to be; but this is no ordinary case. You know I loved that girl
and wanted to marry her; but, although that's all past and gone, I can't
help feeling anxious about her all the same. What is it that's wrong
with her? The Dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see
that--said, that time you two came into the room, that you must have
_another_ transfusion of blood, and that both you and he were exhausted.
Now I know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a man
must not expect to know what they consult about in private. But this is
no common matter, and, whatever it is, I have done my part. Is not that
so?"

"That's so," I said, and he went on:--

"I take it that both you and Van Helsing had done already what I did
to-day. Is not that so?"

"That's so."

"And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him four days ago down at his
own place he looked queer. I have not seen anything pulled down so quick
since I was on the Pampas and had a mare that I was fond of go to grass
all in a night. One of those big bats that they call vampires had got at
her in the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there
wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up, and I had to put a
bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without
betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that so?" As he spoke
the poor fellow looked terribly anxious. He was in a torture of suspense
regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible
mystery which seemed to surround her intensified his pain. His very
heart was bleeding, and it took all the manhood of him--and there was a
royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. I paused before
answering, for I felt that I must not betray anything which the
Professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed
so much, that there could be no reason for not answering, so I answered
in the same phrase: "That's so."

"And how long has this been going on?"

"About ten days."

"Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature
that we all love has had put into her veins within that time the blood
of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then,
coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whisper: "What took it
out?"

I shook my head. "That," I said, "is the crux. Van Helsing is simply
frantic about it, and I am at my wits' end. I can't even hazard a guess.
There has been a series of little circumstances which have thrown out
all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall
not occur again. Here we stay until all be well--or ill." Quincey held
out his hand. "Count me in," he said. "You and the Dutchman will tell me
what to do, and I'll do it."

When she woke late in the afternoon, Lucy's first movement was to feel
in her breast, and, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing
had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had
come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van
Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked around the room,
and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put her
poor thin hands before her pale face. We both understood what that
meant--that she had realised to the full her mother's death; so we tried
what we could to comfort her. Doubtless sympathy eased her somewhat, but
she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for
a long time. We told her that either or both of us would now remain with
her all the time, and that seemed to comfort her. Towards dusk she fell
into a doze. Here a very odd thing occurred. Whilst still asleep she
took the paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped
over and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on
with the action of tearing, as though the material were still in her
hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering
the fragments. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as
if in thought, but he said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 September._--All last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid
to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from it. The Professor and
I took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment
unattended. Quincey Morris said nothing about his intention, but I knew
that all night long he patrolled round and round the house.

When the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor Lucy's
strength. She was hardly able to turn her head, and the little
nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she
slept, and both Van Helsing and I noticed the difference in her, between
sleeping and waking. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more
haggard, and her breathing was softer; her open mouth showed the pale
gums drawn back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and
sharper than usual; when she woke the softness of her eyes evidently
changed the expression, for she looked her own self, although a dying
one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him.
Quincey went off to meet him at the station.

When he arrived it was nearly six o'clock, and the sun was setting full
and warm, and the red light streamed in through the window and gave more
colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking
with emotion, and none of us could speak. In the hours that had passed,
the fits of sleep, or the comatose condition that passed for it, had
grown more frequent, so that the pauses when conversation was possible
were shortened. Arthur's presence, however, seemed to act as a
stimulant; she rallied a little, and spoke to him more brightly than she
had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as
cheerily as he could, so that the best was made of everything.

It was now nearly one o'clock, and he and Van Helsing are sitting with
her. I am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and I am entering
this on Lucy's phonograph. Until six o'clock they are to try to rest. I
fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too
great; the poor child cannot rally. God help us all.


_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

(Unopened by her.)

"_17 September._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"It seems _an age_ since I heard from you, or indeed since I wrote. You
will pardon me, I know, for all my faults when you have read all my
budget of news. Well, I got my husband back all right; when we arrived
at Exeter there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had
an attack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his house, where there
were rooms for us all nice and comfortable, and we dined together. After
dinner Mr. Hawkins said:--

"'My dears, I want to drink your health and prosperity; and may every
blessing attend you both. I know you both from children, and have, with
love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to make your home here
with me. I have left to me neither chick nor child; all are gone, and in
my will I have left you everything.' I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and
the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one.

"So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my
bedroom and the drawing-room I can see the great elms of the cathedral
close, with their great black stems standing out against the old yellow
stone of the cathedral and I can hear the rooks overhead cawing and
cawing and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner of
rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not tell you, arranging things and
housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that
Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him all about the
clients.

"How is your dear mother getting on? I wish I could run up to town for a
day or two to see you, dear, but I dare not go yet, with so much on my
shoulders; and Jonathan wants looking after still. He is beginning to
put some flesh on his bones again, but he was terribly weakened by the
long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his sleep in a sudden
way and awakes all trembling until I can coax him back to his usual
placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the
days go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust. And now
I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be married,
and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you to wear,
and is it to be a public or a private wedding? Tell me all about it,
dear; tell me all about everything, for there is nothing which interests
you which will not be dear to me. Jonathan asks me to send his
'respectful duty,' but I do not think that is good enough from the
junior partner of the important firm Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you
love me, and he loves me, and I love you with all the moods and tenses
of the verb, I send you simply his 'love' instead. Good-bye, my dearest
Lucy, and all blessings on you.

"Yours,

"MINA HARKER."


_Report from Patrick Hennessey, M. D., M. R. C. S. L. K. Q. C. P. I.,
etc., etc., to John Seward, M. D._

"_20 September._

"My dear Sir,--

"In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the conditions of
everything left in my charge.... With regard to patient, Renfield, there
is more to say. He has had another outbreak, which might have had a
dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended
with any unhappy results. This afternoon a carrier's cart with two men
made a call at the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to
which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped at
our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers. I was
myself looking out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner, and
saw one of them come up to the house. As he passed the window of
Renfield's room, the patient began to rate him from within, and called
him all the foul names he could lay his tongue to. The man, who seemed a
decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to "shut up for a
foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and
wanting to murder him and said that he would hinder him if he were to
swing for it. I opened the window and signed to the man not to notice,
so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his
mind as to what kind of a place he had got to by saying: 'Lor' bless
yer, sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a bloomin' madhouse. I
pity ye and the guv'nor for havin' to live in the house with a wild
beast like that.' Then he asked his way civilly enough, and I told him
where the gate of the empty house was; he went away, followed by threats
and curses and revilings from our man. I went down to see if I could
make out any cause for his anger, since he is usually such a
well-behaved man, and except his violent fits nothing of the kind had
ever occurred. I found him, to my astonishment, quite composed and most
genial in his manner. I tried to get him to talk of the incident, but he
blandly asked me questions as to what I meant, and led me to believe
that he was completely oblivious of the affair. It was, I am sorry to
say, however, only another instance of his cunning, for within half an
hour I heard of him again. This time he had broken out through the
window of his room, and was running down the avenue. I called to the
attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I feared he was intent
on some mischief. My fear was justified when I saw the same cart which
had passed before coming down the road, having on it some great wooden
boxes. The men were wiping their foreheads, and were flushed in the
face, as if with violent exercise. Before I could get up to him the
patient rushed at them, and pulling one of them off the cart, began to
knock his head against the ground. If I had not seized him just at the
moment I believe he would have killed the man there and then. The other
fellow jumped down and struck him over the head with the butt-end of his
heavy whip. It was a terrible blow; but he did not seem to mind it, but
seized him also, and struggled with the three of us, pulling us to and
fro as if we were kittens. You know I am no light weight, and the others
were both burly men. At first he was silent in his fighting; but as we
began to master him, and the attendants were putting a strait-waistcoat
on him, he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me!
they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' and
all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with very considerable
difficulty that they got him back to the house and put him in the padded
room. One of the attendants, Hardy, had a finger broken. However, I set
it all right; and he is going on well.

"The two carriers were at first loud in their threats of actions for
damages, and promised to rain all the penalties of the law on us. Their
threats were, however, mingled with some sort of indirect apology for
the defeat of the two of them by a feeble madman. They said that if it
had not been for the way their strength had been spent in carrying and
raising the heavy boxes to the cart they would have made short work of
him. They gave as another reason for their defeat the extraordinary
state of drouth to which they had been reduced by the dusty nature of
their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the scene of their
labours of any place of public entertainment. I quite understood their
drift, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same, and
with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the attack, and swore
that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure of
meeting so 'bloomin' good a bloke' as your correspondent. I took their
names and addresses, in case they might be needed. They are as
follows:--Jack Smollet, of Dudding's Rents, King George's Road, Great
Walworth, and Thomas Snelling, Peter Farley's Row, Guide Court, Bethnal
Green. They are both in the employment of Harris & Sons, Moving and
Shipment Company, Orange Master's Yard, Soho.

"I shall report to you any matter of interest occurring here, and shall
wire you at once if there is anything of importance.

"Believe me, dear Sir,

"Yours faithfully,

"PATRICK HENNESSEY."


_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_.

(Unopened by her.)

"_18 September._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly.
Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him
that it really seems as though we had lost a father. I never knew either
father or mother, so that the dear old man's death is a real blow to me.
Jonathan is greatly distressed. It is not only that he feels sorrow,
deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his life,
and now at the end has treated him like his own son and left him a
fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond the
dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says the
amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous. He
begins to doubt himself. I try to cheer him up, and _my_ belief in _him_
helps him to have a belief in himself. But it is here that the grave
shock that he experienced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too hard
that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature which
enabled him by our dear, good friend's aid to rise from clerk to master
in a few years--should be so injured that the very essence of its
strength is gone. Forgive me, dear, if I worry you with my troubles in
the midst of your own happiness; but, Lucy dear, I must tell some one,
for the strain of keeping up a brave and cheerful appearance to Jonathan
tries me, and I have no one here that I can confide in. I dread coming
up to London, as we must do the day after to-morrow; for poor Mr.
Hawkins left in his will that he was to be buried in the grave with his
father. As there are no relations at all, Jonathan will have to be chief
mourner. I shall try to run over to see you, dearest, if only for a few
minutes. Forgive me for troubling you. With all blessings,

"Your loving

"MINA HARKER."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_20 September._--Only resolution and habit can let me make an entry
to-night. I am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of the world
and all in it, including life itself, that I would not care if I heard
this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has
been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--Lucy's mother
and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work.

I duly relieved Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to
go to rest also, but he refused at first. It was only when I told him
that we should want him to help us during the day, and that we must not
all break down for want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed
to go. Van Helsing was very kind to him. "Come, my child," he said;
"come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much
mental pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. You
must not be alone; for to be alone is to be full of fears and alarms.
Come to the drawing-room, where there is a big fire, and there are two
sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sympathy will
be comfort to each other, even though we do not speak, and even if we
sleep." Arthur went off with him, casting back a longing look on Lucy's
face, which lay in her pillow, almost whiter than the lawn. She lay
quite still, and I looked round the room to see that all was as it
should be. I could see that the Professor had carried out in this room,
as in the other, his purpose of using the garlic; the whole of the
window-sashes reeked with it, and round Lucy's neck, over the silk
handkerchief which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of
the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and
her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. Her
teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than they
had been in the morning. In particular, by some trick of the light, the
canine teeth looked longer and sharper than the rest. I sat down by her,
and presently she moved uneasily. At the same moment there came a sort
of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. I went over to it softly,
and peeped out by the corner of the blind. There was a full moonlight,
and I could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled
round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every now
and again struck the window with its wings. When I came back to my seat,
I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic
flowers from her throat. I replaced them as well as I could, and sat
watching her.

Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing had prescribed.
She took but a little, and that languidly. There did not seem to be with
her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had hitherto
so marked her illness. It struck me as curious that the moment she
became conscious she pressed the garlic flowers close to her. It was
certainly odd that whenever she got into that lethargic state, with the
stertorous breathing, she put the flowers from her; but that when she
waked she clutched them close. There was no possibility of making any
mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed, she had many
spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times.

At six o'clock Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur had then fallen
into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. When he saw Lucy's face
I could hear the sissing indraw of his breath, and he said to me in a
sharp whisper: "Draw up the blind; I want light!" Then he bent down,
and, with his face almost touching Lucy's, examined her carefully. He
removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat. As
he did so he started back, and I could hear his ejaculation, "Mein
Gott!" as it was smothered in his throat. I bent over and looked, too,
and as I noticed some queer chill came over me.

The wounds on the throat had absolutely disappeared.

For fully five minutes Van Helsing stood looking at her, with his face
at its sternest. Then he turned to me and said calmly:--

"She is dying. It will not be long now. It will be much difference, mark
me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. Wake that poor boy, and
let him come and see the last; he trusts us, and we have promised him."

I went to the dining-room and waked him. He was dazed for a moment, but
when he saw the sunlight streaming in through the edges of the shutters
he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him that Lucy
was still asleep, but told him as gently as I could that both Van
Helsing and I feared that the end was near. He covered his face with his
hands, and slid down on his knees by the sofa, where he remained,
perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders
shook with grief. I took him by the hand and raised him up. "Come," I
said, "my dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude: it will be best
and easiest for her."

When we came into Lucy's room I could see that Van Helsing had, with
his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making
everything look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's
hair, so that it lay on the pillow in its usual sunny ripples. When we
came into the room she opened her eyes, and seeing him, whispered
softly:--

"Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come!" He was stooping to
kiss her, when Van Helsing motioned him back. "No," he whispered, "not
yet! Hold her hand; it will comfort her more."

So Arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and she looked her best,
with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her eyes. Then
gradually her eyes closed, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit her
breast heaved softly, and her breath came and went like a tired child's.

And then insensibly there came the strange change which I had noticed in
the night. Her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the pale
gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than ever. In a
sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, which
were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft, voluptuous voice,
such as I had never heard from her lips:--

"Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come! Kiss me!" Arthur bent
eagerly over to kiss her; but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me,
had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by
the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which
I never thought he could have possessed, and actually hurled him almost
across the room.

"Not for your life!" he said; "not for your living soul and hers!" And
he stood between them like a lion at bay.

Arthur was so taken aback that he did not for a moment know what to do
or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him he realised
the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting.

I kept my eyes fixed on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and we saw a spasm as
of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed
together. Then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily.

Very shortly after she opened her eyes in all their softness, and
putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great brown
one; drawing it to her, she kissed it. "My true friend," she said, in a
faint voice, but with untellable pathos, "My true friend, and his! Oh,
guard him, and give me peace!"

"I swear it!" he said solemnly, kneeling beside her and holding up his
hand, as one who registers an oath. Then he turned to Arthur, and said
to him: "Come, my child, take her hand in yours, and kiss her on the
forehead, and only once."

Their eyes met instead of their lips; and so they parted.

Lucy's eyes closed; and Van Helsing, who had been watching closely, took
Arthur's arm, and drew him away.

And then Lucy's breathing became stertorous again, and all at once it
ceased.

"It is all over," said Van Helsing. "She is dead!"

I took Arthur by the arm, and led him away to the drawing-room, where he
sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way that
nearly broke me down to see.

I went back to the room, and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and
his face was sterner than ever. Some change had come over her body.
Death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had
recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their
deadly pallor. It was as if the blood, no longer needed for the working
of the heart, had gone to make the harshness of death as little rude as
might be.

    "We thought her dying whilst she slept,
        And sleeping when she died."

I stood beside Van Helsing, and said:--

"Ah, well, poor girl, there is peace for her at last. It is the end!"

He turned to me, and said with grave solemnity:--

"Not so; alas! not so. It is only the beginning!"

When I asked him what he meant, he only shook his head and answered:--

"We can do nothing as yet. Wait and see."




CHAPTER XIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_.


The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and
her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the ghastly
formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were
afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own obsequious suavity.
Even the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to
me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had come out
from the death-chamber:--

"She makes a very beautiful corpse, sir. It's quite a privilege to
attend on her. It's not too much to say that she will do credit to our
establishment!"

I noticed that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from
the disordered state of things in the household. There were no relatives
at hand; and as Arthur had to be back the next day to attend at his
father's funeral, we were unable to notify any one who should have been
bidden. Under the circumstances, Van Helsing and I took it upon
ourselves to examine papers, etc. He insisted upon looking over Lucy's
papers himself. I asked him why, for I feared that he, being a
foreigner, might not be quite aware of English legal requirements, and
so might in ignorance make some unnecessary trouble. He answered me:--

"I know; I know. You forget that I am a lawyer as well as a doctor. But
this is not altogether for the law. You knew that, when you avoided the
coroner. I have more than him to avoid. There may be papers more--such
as this."

As he spoke he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been
in Lucy's breast, and which she had torn in her sleep.

"When you find anything of the solicitor who is for the late Mrs.
Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him to-night. For me, I watch
here in the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I myself
search for what may be. It is not well that her very thoughts go into
the hands of strangers."

I went on with my part of the work, and in another half hour had found
the name and address of Mrs. Westenra's solicitor and had written to
him. All the poor lady's papers were in order; explicit directions
regarding the place of burial were given. I had hardly sealed the
letter, when, to my surprise, Van Helsing walked into the room,
saying:--

"Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I may, my service is to
you."

"Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he replied:--

"I did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I
have, all that there was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a
diary new begun. But I have them here, and we shall for the present say
nothing of them. I shall see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with
his sanction, I shall use some."

When we had finished the work in hand, he said to me:--

"And now, friend John, I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you
and I, and rest to recuperate. To-morrow we shall have much to do, but
for the to-night there is no need of us. Alas!"

Before turning in we went to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had
certainly done his work well, for the room was turned into a small
_chapelle ardente_. There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers,
and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the
winding-sheet was laid over the face; when the Professor bent over and
turned it gently back, we both started at the beauty before us, the tall
wax candles showing a sufficient light to note it well. All Lucy's
loveliness had come back to her in death, and the hours that had passed,
instead of leaving traces of "decay's effacing fingers," had but
restored the beauty of life, till positively I could not believe my eyes
that I was looking at a corpse.

The Professor looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and
there was no need for tears in his eyes. He said to me: "Remain till I
return," and left the room. He came back with a handful of wild garlic
from the box waiting in the hall, but which had not been opened, and
placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the bed. Then he
took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and
placed it over the mouth. He restored the sheet to its place, and we
came away.

I was undressing in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the
door, he entered, and at once began to speak:--

"To-morrow I want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem
knives."

"Must we make an autopsy?" I asked.

"Yes and no. I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you
now, but not a word to another. I want to cut off her head and take out
her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have seen with
no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and death that make
the rest shudder. Oh, but I must not forget, my dear friend John, that
you loved her; and I have not forgotten it, for it is I that shall
operate, and you must only help. I would like to do it to-night, but for
Arthur I must not; he will be free after his father's funeral to-morrow,
and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined
ready for the next day, you and I shall come when all sleep. We shall
unscrew the coffin-lid, and shall do our operation: and then replace
all, so that none know, save we alone."

"But why do it at all? The girl is dead. Why mutilate her poor body
without need? And if there is no necessity for a post-mortem and nothing
to gain by it--no good to her, to us, to science, to human
knowledge--why do it? Without such it is monstrous."

For answer he put his hand on my shoulder, and said, with infinite
tenderness:--

"Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love you the more
because it does so bleed. If I could, I would take on myself the burden
that you do bear. But there are things that you know not, but that you
shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are not pleasant
things. John, my child, you have been my friend now many years, and yet
did you ever know me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but
man; but I believe in all I do. Was it not for these causes that you
send for me when the great trouble came? Yes! Were you not amazed, nay
horrified, when I would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was
dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw
how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so
weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not
hear me swear promise to her, that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes!

"Well, I have good reason now for all I want to do. You have for many
years trust me; you have believe me weeks past, when there be things so
strange that you might have well doubt. Believe me yet a little, friend
John. If you trust me not, then I must tell what I think; and that is
not perhaps well. And if I work--as work I shall, no matter trust or no
trust--without my friend trust in me, I work with heavy heart and feel,
oh! so lonely when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a
moment and went on solemnly: "Friend John, there are strange and
terrible days before us. Let us not be two, but one, that so we work to
a good end. Will you not have faith in me?"

I took his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went away,
and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood without
moving, I saw one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had
her back towards me, so did not see me--and go into the room where Lucy
lay. The sight touched me. Devotion is so rare, and we are so grateful
to those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a poor girl
putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of death to go watch
alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the poor clay
might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest....

       *       *       *       *       *

I must have slept long and soundly, for it was broad daylight when Van
Helsing waked me by coming into my room. He came over to my bedside and
said:--

"You need not trouble about the knives; we shall not do it."

"Why not?" I asked. For his solemnity of the night before had greatly
impressed me.

"Because," he said sternly, "it is too late--or too early. See!" Here he
held up the little golden crucifix. "This was stolen in the night."

"How, stolen," I asked in wonder, "since you have it now?"

"Because I get it back from the worthless wretch who stole it, from the
woman who robbed the dead and the living. Her punishment will surely
come, but not through me; she knew not altogether what she did and thus
unknowing, she only stole. Now we must wait."

He went away on the word, leaving me with a new mystery to think of, a
new puzzle to grapple with.

The forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr.
Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very genial
and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off our hands all
cares as to details. During lunch he told us that Mrs. Westenra had for
some time expected sudden death from her heart, and had put her affairs
in absolute order; he informed us that, with the exception of a certain
entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct
issue, went back to a distant branch of the family, the whole estate,
real and personal, was left absolutely to Arthur Holmwood. When he had
told us so much he went on:--

"Frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and
pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter either
penniless or not so free as she should be to act regarding a matrimonial
alliance. Indeed, we pressed the matter so far that we almost came into
collision, for she asked us if we were or were not prepared to carry out
her wishes. Of course, we had then no alternative but to accept. We were
right in principle, and ninety-nine times out of a hundred we should
have proved, by the logic of events, the accuracy of our judgment.
Frankly, however, I must admit that in this case any other form of
disposition would have rendered impossible the carrying out of her
wishes. For by her predeceasing her daughter the latter would have come
into possession of the property, and, even had she only survived her
mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there were no
will--and a will was a practical impossibility in such a case--have been
treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case Lord Godalming,
though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the world; and the
inheritors, being remote, would not be likely to abandon their just
rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger. I assure
you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced."

He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which
he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy, was an
object-lesson in the limitations of sympathetic understanding.

He did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day and
see Lord Godalming. His coming, however, had been a certain comfort to
us, since it assured us that we should not have to dread hostile
criticism as to any of our acts. Arthur was expected at five o'clock, so
a little before that time we visited the death-chamber. It was so in
very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker,
true to his craft, had made the best display he could of his goods, and
there was a mortuary air about the place that lowered our spirits at
once. Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to,
explaining that, as Lord Godalming was coming very soon, it would be
less harrowing to his feelings to see all that was left of his _fiancée_
quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity and
exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them
the night before, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings
as we could avoid were saved.

Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart
manhood seemed to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of his
much-tried emotions. He had, I knew, been very genuinely and devotedly
attached to his father; and to lose him, and at such a time, was a
bitter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing he
was sweetly courteous; but I could not help seeing that there was some
constraint with him. The Professor noticed it, too, and motioned me to
bring him upstairs. I did so, and left him at the door of the room, as I
felt he would like to be quite alone with her, but he took my arm and
led me in, saying huskily:--

"You loved her too, old fellow; she told me all about it, and there was
no friend had a closer place in her heart than you. I don't know how to
thank you for all you have done for her. I can't think yet...."

Here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round my shoulders and
laid his head on my breast, crying:--

"Oh, Jack! Jack! What shall I do! The whole of life seems gone from me
all at once, and there is nothing in the wide world for me to live for."

I comforted him as well as I could. In such cases men do not need much
expression. A grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the
shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man's
heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I said
softly to him:--

"Come and look at her."

Together we moved over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face.
God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be enhancing her
loveliness. It frightened and amazed me somewhat; and as for Arthur, he
fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At
last, after a long pause, he said to me in a faint whisper:--

"Jack, is she really dead?"

I assured him sadly that it was so, and went on to suggest--for I felt
that such a horrible doubt should not have life for a moment longer than
I could help--that it often happened that after death faces became
softened and even resolved into their youthful beauty; that this was
especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged
suffering. It seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and, after
kneeling beside the couch for a while and looking at her lovingly and
long, he turned aside. I told him that that must be good-bye, as the
coffin had to be prepared; so he went back and took her dead hand in his
and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her forehead. He came away,
fondly looking back over his shoulder at her as he came.

I left him in the drawing-room, and told Van Helsing that he had said
good-bye; so the latter went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men
to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he
came out of the room again I told him of Arthur's question, and he
replied:--

"I am not surprised. Just now I doubted for a moment myself!"

We all dined together, and I could see that poor Art was trying to make
the best of things. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but
when we had lit our cigars he said--

"Lord----"; but Arthur interrupted him:--

"No, no, not that, for God's sake! not yet at any rate. Forgive me, sir:
I did not mean to speak offensively; it is only because my loss is so
recent."

The Professor answered very sweetly:--

"I only used that name because I was in doubt. I must not call you
'Mr.,' and I have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--as
Arthur."

Arthur held out his hand, and took the old man's warmly.

"Call me what you will," he said. "I hope I may always have the title of
a friend. And let me say that I am at a loss for words to thank you for
your goodness to my poor dear." He paused a moment, and went on: "I know
that she understood your goodness even better than I do; and if I was
rude or in any way wanting at that time you acted so--you remember"--the
Professor nodded--"you must forgive me."

He answered with a grave kindness:--

"I know it was hard for you to quite trust me then, for to trust such
violence needs to understand; and I take it that you do not--that you
cannot--trust me now, for you do not yet understand. And there may be
more times when I shall want you to trust when you cannot--and may
not--and must not yet understand. But the time will come when your trust
shall be whole and complete in me, and when you shall understand as
though the sunlight himself shone through. Then you shall bless me from
first to last for your own sake, and for the sake of others and for her
dear sake to whom I swore to protect."

"And, indeed, indeed, sir," said Arthur warmly, "I shall in all ways
trust you. I know and believe you have a very noble heart, and you are
Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what you like."

The Professor cleared his throat a couple of times, as though about to
speak, and finally said:--

"May I ask you something now?"

"Certainly."

"You know that Mrs. Westenra left you all her property?"

"No, poor dear; I never thought of it."

"And as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with it as you will. I
want you to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and
letters. Believe me, it is no idle curiosity. I have a motive of which,
be sure, she would have approved. I have them all here. I took them
before we knew that all was yours, so that no strange hand might touch
them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep
them, if I may; even you may not see them yet, but I shall keep them
safe. No word shall be lost; and in the good time I shall give them back
to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will do it, will you not, for
Lucy's sake?"

Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, you may do what you will. I feel that in saying this I
am doing what my dear one would have approved. I shall not trouble you
with questions till the time comes."

The old Professor stood up as he said solemnly:--

"And you are right. There will be pain for us all; but it will not be
all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We and you too--you most of
all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the bitter water before we
reach the sweet. But we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and do our
duty, and all will be well!"

I slept on a sofa in Arthur's room that night. Van Helsing did not go to
bed at all. He went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was
never out of sight of the room where Lucy lay in her coffin, strewn with
the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of lily and rose,
a heavy, overpowering smell into the night.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_22 September._--In the train to Exeter. Jonathan sleeping.

It seems only yesterday that the last entry was made, and yet how much
between then, in Whitby and all the world before me, Jonathan away and
no news of him; and now, married to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a
partner, rich, master of his business, Mr. Hawkins dead and buried, and
Jonathan with another attack that may harm him. Some day he may ask me
about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my shorthand--see what
unexpected prosperity does for us--so it may be as well to freshen it up
again with an exercise anyhow....

The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only ourselves
and the servants there, one or two old friends of his from Exeter, his
London agent, and a gentleman representing Sir John Paxton, the
President of the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I stood hand in
hand, and we felt that our best and dearest friend was gone from us....

We came back to town quietly, taking a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner.
Jonathan thought it would interest me to go into the Row for a while, so
we sat down; but there were very few people there, and it was
sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think
of the empty chair at home; so we got up and walked down Piccadilly.
Jonathan was holding me by the arm, the way he used to in old days
before I went to school. I felt it very improper, for you can't go on
for some years teaching etiquette and decorum to other girls without the
pedantry of it biting into yourself a bit; but it was Jonathan, and he
was my husband, and we didn't know anybody who saw us--and we didn't
care if they did--so on we walked. I was looking at a very beautiful
girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's,
when I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and he said
under his breath: "My God!" I am always anxious about Jonathan, for I
fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned to him
quickly, and asked him what it was that disturbed him.

He was very pale, and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and
half in amazement, he gazed at a tall, thin man, with a beaky nose and
black moustache and pointed beard, who was also observing the pretty
girl. He was looking at her so hard that he did not see either of us,
and so I had a good view of him. His face was not a good face; it was
hard, and cruel, and sensual, and his big white teeth, that looked all
the whiter because his lips were so red, were pointed like an animal's.
Jonathan kept staring at him, till I was afraid he would notice. I
feared he might take it ill, he looked so fierce and nasty. I asked
Jonathan why he was disturbed, and he answered, evidently thinking that
I knew as much about it as he did: "Do you see who it is?"

"No, dear," I said; "I don't know him; who is it?" His answer seemed to
shock and thrill me, for it was said as if he did not know that it was
to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:--

"It is the man himself!"

The poor dear was evidently terrified at something--very greatly
terrified; I do believe that if he had not had me to lean on and to
support him he would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came out of
the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to the lady, who then drove
off. The dark man kept his eyes fixed on her, and when the carriage
moved up Piccadilly he followed in the same direction, and hailed a
hansom. Jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as if to himself:--

"I believe it is the Count, but he has grown young. My God, if this be
so! Oh, my God! my God! If I only knew! if I only knew!" He was
distressing himself so much that I feared to keep his mind on the
subject by asking him any questions, so I remained silent. I drew him
away quietly, and he, holding my arm, came easily. We walked a little
further, and then went in and sat for a while in the Green Park. It was
a hot day for autumn, and there was a comfortable seat in a shady place.
After a few minutes' staring at nothing, Jonathan's eyes closed, and he
went quietly into a sleep, with his head on my shoulder. I thought it
was the best thing for him, so did not disturb him. In about twenty
minutes he woke up, and said to me quite cheerfully:--

"Why, Mina, have I been asleep! Oh, do forgive me for being so rude.
Come, and we'll have a cup of tea somewhere." He had evidently forgotten
all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that
this episode had reminded him of. I don't like this lapsing into
forgetfulness; it may make or continue some injury to the brain. I must
not ask him, for fear I shall do more harm than good; but I must somehow
learn the facts of his journey abroad. The time is come, I fear, when I
must open that parcel, and know what is written. Oh, Jonathan, you will,
I know, forgive me if I do wrong, but it is for your own dear sake.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear
soul who was so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight
relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he
may be:--

"You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and
that Lucy died the day before yesterday. They were both buried to-day."

Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! Poor Mrs. Westenra! poor
Lucy! Gone, gone, never to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have
lost such sweetness out of his life! God help us all to bear our
troubles.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_22 September._--It is all over. Arthur has gone back to Ring, and has
taken Quincey Morris with him. What a fine fellow is Quincey! I believe
in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about Lucy's death as any
of us; but he bore himself through it like a moral Viking. If America
can go on breeding men like that, she will be a power in the world
indeed. Van Helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to his
journey. He goes over to Amsterdam to-night, but says he returns
to-morrow night; that he only wants to make some arrangements which can
only be made personally. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he says
he has work to do in London which may take him some time. Poor old
fellow! I fear that the strain of the past week has broken down even his
iron strength. All the time of the burial he was, I could see, putting
some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all over, we were
standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in
the operation where his blood had been transfused to his Lucy's veins; I
could see Van Helsing's face grow white and purple by turns. Arthur was
saying that he felt since then as if they two had been really married
and that she was his wife in the sight of God. None of us said a word of
the other operations, and none of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey went
away together to the station, and Van Helsing and I came on here. The
moment we were alone in the carriage he gave way to a regular fit of
hysterics. He has denied to me since that it was hysterics, and insisted
that it was only his sense of humour asserting itself under very
terrible conditions. He laughed till he cried, and I had to draw down
the blinds lest any one should see us and misjudge; and then he cried,
till he laughed again; and laughed and cried together, just as a woman
does. I tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the
circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are so different in
manifestations of nervous strength or weakness! Then when his face grew
grave and stern again I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time.
His reply was in a way characteristic of him, for it was logical and
forceful and mysterious. He said:--

"Ah, you don't comprehend, friend John. Do not think that I am not sad,
though I laugh. See, I have cried even when the laugh did choke me. But
no more think that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come
just the same. Keep it always with you that laughter who knock at your
door and say, 'May I come in?' is not the true laughter. No! he is a
king, and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no
time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' Behold, in example I grieve my
heart out for that so sweet young girl; I give my blood for her, though
I am old and worn; I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other
sufferers want that so she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very
grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her
coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, till it send back the blood
from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of
the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his
hair and eyes the same. There, you know now why I love him so. And yet
when he say things that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my
father-heart yearn to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend
John, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet even
at such moment King Laugh he come to me and shout and bellow in my ear,
'Here I am! here I am!' till the blood come dance back and bring some of
the sunshine that he carry with him to my cheek. Oh, friend John, it is
a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and
troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the
tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard, and
tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the music that he
make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, that
he is good to come, and kind. Ah, we men and women are like ropes drawn
tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and,
like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain
become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come like the
sunshine, and he ease off the strain again; and we bear to go on with
our labour, what it may be."

I did not like to wound him by pretending not to see his idea; but, as I
did not yet understand the cause of his laughter, I asked him. As he
answered me his face grew stern, and he said in quite a different
tone:--

"Oh, it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded with
flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we wondered if she
were truly dead; she laid in that so fine marble house in that lonely
churchyard, where rest so many of her kin, laid there with the mother
who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going 'Toll!
toll! toll!' so sad and slow; and those holy men, with the white
garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time
their eyes never on the page; and all of us with the bowed head. And all
for what? She is dead; so! Is it not?"

"Well, for the life of me, Professor," I said, "I can't see anything to
laugh at in all that. Why, your explanation makes it a harder puzzle
than before. But even if the burial service was comic, what about poor
Art and his trouble? Why, his heart was simply breaking."

"Just so. Said he not that the transfusion of his blood to her veins had
made her truly his bride?"

"Yes, and it was a sweet and comforting idea for him."

"Quite so. But there was a difficulty, friend John. If so that, then
what about the others? Ho, ho! Then this so sweet maid is a polyandrist,
and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but alive by Church's law, though
no wits, all gone--even I, who am faithful husband to this now-no-wife,
am bigamist."

"I don't see where the joke comes in there either!" I said; and I did
not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. He laid
his hand on my arm, and said:--

"Friend John, forgive me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others
when it would wound, but only to you, my old friend, whom I can trust.
If you could have looked into my very heart then when I want to laugh;
if you could have done so when the laugh arrived; if you could do so
now, when King Laugh have pack up his crown, and all that is to him--for
he go far, far away from me, and for a long, long time--maybe you would
perhaps pity me the most of all."

I was touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked why.

"Because I know!"

And now we are all scattered; and for many a long day loneliness will
sit over our roofs with brooding wings. Lucy lies in the tomb of her
kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming
London; where the air is fresh, and the sun rises over Hampstead Hill,
and where wild flowers grow of their own accord.

So I can finish this diary; and God only knows if I shall ever begin
another. If I do, or if I even open this again, it will be to deal with
different people and different themes; for here at the end, where the
romance of my life is told, ere I go back to take up the thread of my
life-work, I say sadly and without hope,

                        "FINIS."


_"The Westminster Gazette," 25 September._

                          A HAMPSTEAD MYSTERY.


The neighbourhood of Hampstead is just at present exercised with a
series of events which seem to run on lines parallel to those of what
was known to the writers of headlines as "The Kensington Horror," or
"The Stabbing Woman," or "The Woman in Black." During the past two or
three days several cases have occurred of young children straying from
home or neglecting to return from their playing on the Heath. In all
these cases the children were too young to give any properly
intelligible account of themselves, but the consensus of their excuses
is that they had been with a "bloofer lady." It has always been late in
the evening when they have been missed, and on two occasions the
children have not been found until early in the following morning. It is
generally supposed in the neighbourhood that, as the first child missed
gave as his reason for being away that a "bloofer lady" had asked him to
come for a walk, the others had picked up the phrase and used it as
occasion served. This is the more natural as the favourite game of the
little ones at present is luring each other away by wiles. A
correspondent writes us that to see some of the tiny tots pretending to
be the "bloofer lady" is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists
might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing the
reality and the picture. It is only in accordance with general
principles of human nature that the "bloofer lady" should be the popular
rôle at these _al fresco_ performances. Our correspondent naïvely says
that even Ellen Terry could not be so winningly attractive as some of
these grubby-faced little children pretend--and even imagine
themselves--to be.

There is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some of
the children, indeed all who have been missed at night, have been
slightly torn or wounded in the throat. The wounds seem such as might be
made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not much importance
individually, would tend to show that whatever animal inflicts them has
a system or method of its own. The police of the division have been
instructed to keep a sharp look-out for straying children, especially
when very young, in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog
which may be about.


               _"The Westminster Gazette," 25 September._

                            _Extra Special._

                         THE HAMPSTEAD HORROR.

                         ANOTHER CHILD INJURED.

                         _The "Bloofer Lady."_

We have just received intelligence that another child, missed last
night, was only discovered late in the morning under a furze bush at the
Shooter's Hill side of Hampstead Heath, which is, perhaps, less
frequented than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the
throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and
looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common
story to tell of being lured away by the "bloofer lady."




CHAPTER XIV

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


_23 September_.--Jonathan is better after a bad night. I am so glad that
he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps his mind off the terrible
things; and oh, I am rejoiced that he is not now weighed down with the
responsibility of his new position. I knew he would be true to himself,
and now how proud I am to see my Jonathan rising to the height of his
advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties that come upon
him. He will be away all day till late, for he said he could not lunch
at home. My household work is done, so I shall take his foreign journal,
and lock myself up in my room and read it....


_24 September_.--I hadn't the heart to write last night; that terrible
record of Jonathan's upset me so. Poor dear! How he must have suffered,
whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is any truth
in it at all. Did he get his brain fever, and then write all those
terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I shall
never know, for I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that man
we saw yesterday! He seemed quite certain of him.... Poor fellow! I
suppose it was the funeral upset him and sent his mind back on some
train of thought.... He believes it all himself. I remember how on our
wedding-day he said: "Unless some solemn duty come upon me to go back to
the bitter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane." There seems to be
through it all some thread of continuity.... That fearful Count was
coming to London.... If it should be, and he came to London, with his
teeming millions.... There may be a solemn duty; and if it come we must
not shrink from it.... I shall be prepared. I shall get my typewriter
this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall be ready for other
eyes if required. And if it be wanted; then, perhaps, if I am ready,
poor Jonathan may not be upset, for I can speak for him and never let
him be troubled or worried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets
over the nervousness he may want to tell me of it all, and I can ask him
questions and find out things, and see how I may comfort him.


_Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

"_24 September._

(_Confidence_)

"Dear Madam,--

"I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am so far friend as that I
sent to you sad news of Miss Lucy Westenra's death. By the kindness of
Lord Godalming, I am empowered to read her letters and papers, for I am
deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I find
some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you
love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me. It is
for others' good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much
and terrible troubles--that may be more great than you can know. May it
be that I see you? You can trust me. I am friend of Dr. John Seward and
of Lord Godalming (that was Arthur of Miss Lucy). I must keep it private
for the present from all. I should come to Exeter to see you at once if
you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I implore your
pardon, madam. I have read your letters to poor Lucy, and know how good
you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, if it may be,
enlighten him not, lest it may harm. Again your pardon, and forgive me.

"VAN HELSING."


_Telegram, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._

"_25 September._--Come to-day by quarter-past ten train if you can catch
it. Can see you any time you call.

"WILHELMINA HARKER."

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL.

_25 September._--I cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time
draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect that
it will throw some light upon Jonathan's sad experience; and as he
attended poor dear Lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about
her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her
sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know the real
truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my
imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour. Of
course it is about Lucy. That habit came back to the poor dear, and that
awful night on the cliff must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten
in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him
of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I knew all about
it; and now he wants me to tell him what she knows, so that he may
understand. I hope I did right in not saying anything of it to Mrs.
Westenra; I should never forgive myself if any act of mine, were it even
a negative one, brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope, too, Dr. Van
Helsing will not blame me; I have had so much trouble and anxiety of
late that I feel I cannot bear more just at present.

I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain
does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and
then Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me a whole day
and night, the first time we have been parted since our marriage. I do
hope the dear fellow will take care of himself, and that nothing will
occur to upset him. It is two o'clock, and the doctor will be here soon
now. I shall say nothing of Jonathan's journal unless he asks me. I am
so glad I have type-written out my own journal, so that, in case he asks
about Lucy, I can hand it to him; it will save much questioning.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--He has come and gone. Oh, what a strange meeting, and how it
all makes my head whirl round! I feel like one in a dream. Can it be all
possible, or even a part of it? If I had not read Jonathan's journal
first, I should never have accepted even a possibility. Poor, poor, dear
Jonathan! How he must have suffered. Please the good God, all this may
not upset him again. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be even
a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be and awful in its
consequences--to know for certain that his eyes and ears and brain did
not deceive him, and that it is all true. It may be that it is the doubt
which haunts him; that when the doubt is removed, no matter
which--waking or dreaming--may prove the truth, he will be more
satisfied and better able to bear the shock. Dr. Van Helsing must be a
good man as well as a clever one if he is Arthur's friend and Dr.
Seward's, and if they brought him all the way from Holland to look after
Lucy. I feel from having seen him that he _is_ good and kind and of a
noble nature. When he comes to-morrow I shall ask him about Jonathan;
and then, please God, all this sorrow and anxiety may lead to a good
end. I used to think I would like to practise interviewing; Jonathan's
friend on "The Exeter News" told him that memory was everything in such
work--that you must be able to put down exactly almost every word
spoken, even if you had to refine some of it afterwards. Here was a rare
interview; I shall try to record it _verbatim_.

It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my courage _à
deux mains_ and waited. In a few minutes Mary opened the door, and
announced "Dr. Van Helsing."

I rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of medium weight,
strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and
a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is on the neck. The poise
of the head strikes one at once as indicative of thought and power; the
head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the ears. The face,
clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large, resolute, mobile
mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick, sensitive
nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big, bushy brows come down and the
mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first almost
straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart;
such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it,
but falls naturally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes are set
widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. He
said to me:--

"Mrs. Harker, is it not?" I bowed assent.

"That was Miss Mina Murray?" Again I assented.

"It is Mina Murray that I came to see that was friend of that poor dear
child Lucy Westenra. Madam Mina, it is on account of the dead I come."

"Sir," I said, "you could have no better claim on me than that you were
a friend and helper of Lucy Westenra." And I held out my hand. He took
it and said tenderly:--

"Oh, Madam Mina, I knew that the friend of that poor lily girl must be
good, but I had yet to learn----" He finished his speech with a courtly
bow. I asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about, so he at
once began:--

"I have read your letters to Miss Lucy. Forgive me, but I had to begin
to inquire somewhere, and there was none to ask. I know that you were
with her at Whitby. She sometimes kept a diary--you need not look
surprised, Madam Mina; it was begun after you had left, and was in
imitation of you--and in that diary she traces by inference certain
things to a sleep-walking in which she puts down that you saved her. In
great perplexity then I come to you, and ask you out of your so much
kindness to tell me all of it that you can remember."

"I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, all about it."

"Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? It is not always
so with young ladies."

"No, doctor, but I wrote it all down at the time. I can show it to you
if you like."

"Oh, Madam Mina, I will be grateful; you will do me much favour." I
could not resist the temptation of mystifying him a bit--I suppose it is
some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our
mouths--so I handed him the shorthand diary. He took it with a grateful
bow, and said:--

"May I read it?"

"If you wish," I answered as demurely as I could. He opened it, and for
an instant his face fell. Then he stood up and bowed.

"Oh, you so clever woman!" he said. "I knew long that Mr. Jonathan was a
man of much thankfulness; but see, his wife have all the good things.
And will you not so much honour me and so help me as to read it for me?
Alas! I know not the shorthand." By this time my little joke was over,
and I was almost ashamed; so I took the typewritten copy from my
workbasket and handed it to him.

"Forgive me," I said: "I could not help it; but I had been thinking that
it was of dear Lucy that you wished to ask, and so that you might not
have time to wait--not on my account, but because I know your time must
be precious--I have written it out on the typewriter for you."

He took it and his eyes glistened. "You are so good," he said. "And may
I read it now? I may want to ask you some things when I have read."

"By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you
can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a
chair with his back to the light, and became absorbed in the papers,
whilst I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might not be
disturbed. When I came back, I found him walking hurriedly up and down
the room, his face all ablaze with excitement. He rushed up to me and
took me by both hands.

"Oh, Madam Mina," he said, "how can I say what I owe to you? This paper
is as sunshine. It opens the gate to me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so
much light, and yet clouds roll in behind the light every time. But that
you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am grateful to you, you so
clever woman. Madam"--he said this very solemnly--"if ever Abraham Van
Helsing can do anything for you or yours, I trust you will let me know.
It will be pleasure and delight if I may serve you as a friend; as a
friend, but all I have ever learned, all I can ever do, shall be for you
and those you love. There are darknesses in life, and there are lights;
you are one of the lights. You will have happy life and good life, and
your husband will be blessed in you."

"But, doctor, you praise me too much, and--and you do not know me."

"Not know you--I, who am old, and who have studied all my life men and
women; I, who have made my specialty the brain and all that belongs to
him and all that follow from him! And I have read your diary that you
have so goodly written for me, and which breathes out truth in every
line. I, who have read your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your
marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, good women tell
all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that
angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of
angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are noble too, for
you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your
husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and
is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him about
Jonathan, so I said:--

"He was almost recovered, but he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's
death." He interrupted:--

"Oh, yes, I know, I know. I have read your last two letters." I went
on:--

"I suppose this upset him, for when we were in town on Thursday last he
had a sort of shock."

"A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That was not good. What kind of
a shock was it?"

"He thought he saw some one who recalled something terrible, something
which led to his brain fever." And here the whole thing seemed to
overwhelm me in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he
experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that
has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose I
was hysterical, for I threw myself on my knees and held up my hands to
him, and implored him to make my husband well again. He took my hands
and raised me up, and made me sit on the sofa, and sat by me; he held my
hand in his, and said to me with, oh, such infinite sweetness:--

"My life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of work that I have not
had much time for friendships; but since I have been summoned to here by
my friend John Seward I have known so many good people and seen such
nobility that I feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing
years--the loneliness of my life. Believe, me, then, that I come here
full of respect for you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what I
am seeking of, but that there are good women still left to make life
happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for
the children that are to be. I am glad, glad, that I may here be of some
use to you; for if your husband suffer, he suffer within the range of my
study and experience. I promise you that I will gladly do _all_ for him
that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy
one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious.
Husband Jonathan would not like to see you so pale; and what he like not
where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must eat
and smile. You have told me all about Lucy, and so now we shall not
speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I
want to think much over what you have told me, and when I have thought I
will ask you questions, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me of
husband Jonathan's trouble so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat
now; afterwards you shall tell me all."

After lunch, when we went back to the drawing-room, he said to me:--

"And now tell me all about him." When it came to speaking to this great
learned man, I began to fear that he would think me a weak fool, and
Jonathan a madman--that journal is all so strange--and I hesitated to go
on. But he was so sweet and kind, and he had promised to help, and I
trusted him, so I said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, what I have to tell you is so queer that you must not
laugh at me or at my husband. I have been since yesterday in a sort of
fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and not think me foolish that I
have even half believed some very strange things." He reassured me by
his manner as well as his words when he said:--

"Oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is the matter regarding which
I am here, it is you who would laugh. I have learned not to think little
of any one's belief, no matter how strange it be. I have tried to keep
an open mind; and it is not the ordinary things of life that could close
it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that
make one doubt if they be mad or sane."

"Thank you, thank you, a thousand times! You have taken a weight off my
mind. If you will let me, I shall give you a paper to read. It is long,
but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you my trouble and
Jonathan's. It is the copy of his journal when abroad, and all that
happened. I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and
judge. And then when I see you, perhaps, you will be very kind and tell
me what you think."

"I promise," he said as I gave him the papers; "I shall in the morning,
so soon as I can, come to see you and your husband, if I may."

"Jonathan will be here at half-past eleven, and you must come to lunch
with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which
will leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at my
knowledge of the trains off-hand, but he does not know that I have made
up all the trains to and from Exeter, so that I may help Jonathan in
case he is in a hurry.

So he took the papers with him and went away, and I sit here
thinking--thinking I don't know what.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Letter (by hand), Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

"_25 September, 6 o'clock._

"Dear Madam Mina,--

"I have read your husband's so wonderful diary. You may sleep without
doubt. Strange and terrible as it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my
life on it. It may be worse for others; but for him and you there is no
dread. He is a noble fellow; and let me tell you from experience of men,
that one who would do as he did in going down that wall and to that
room--ay, and going a second time--is not one to be injured in
permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart are all right; this I
swear, before I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall have much to
ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to see you, for
I have learn all at once so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more
than ever, and I must think.

"Yours the most faithful,

"ABRAHAM VAN HELSING."


_Letter, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._

"_25 September, 6:30 p. m._

"My dear Dr. Van Helsing,--

"A thousand thanks for your kind letter, which has taken a great weight
off my mind. And yet, if it be true, what terrible things there are in
the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be really
in London! I fear to think. I have this moment, whilst writing, had a
wire from Jonathan, saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from
Launceston and will be here at 10:18, so that I shall have no fear
to-night. Will you, therefore, instead of lunching with us, please come
to breakfast at eight o'clock, if this be not too early for you? You can
get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, which will bring
you to Paddington by 2:35. Do not answer this, as I shall take it that,
if I do not hear, you will come to breakfast.

"Believe me,

"Your faithful and grateful friend,

"MINA HARKER."


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary again, but the
time has come. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and
when we had supped she told me of Van Helsing's visit, and of her having
given him the two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she has been
about me. She showed me in the doctor's letter that all I wrote down was
true. It seems to have made a new man of me. It was the doubt as to the
reality of the whole thing that knocked me over. I felt impotent, and in
the dark, and distrustful. But, now that I _know_, I am not afraid, even
of the Count. He has succeeded after all, then, in his design in getting
to London, and it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van Helsing
is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is anything like what
Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I
shall call at the hotel in a few minutes and bring him over....

He was, I think, surprised to see me. When I came into the room where he
was, and introduced myself, he took me by the shoulder, and turned my
face round to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:--

"But Madam Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock." It was
so funny to hear my wife called "Madam Mina" by this kindly,
strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:--

"I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already."

"And how?"

"By your letter to Mina last night. I was in doubt, and then everything
took a hue of unreality, and I did not know what to trust, even the
evidence of my own senses. Not knowing what to trust, I did not know
what to do; and so had only to keep on working in what had hitherto been
the groove of my life. The groove ceased to avail me, and I mistrusted
myself. Doctor, you don't know what it is to doubt everything, even
yourself. No, you don't; you couldn't with eyebrows like yours." He
seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:--

"So! You are physiognomist. I learn more here with each hour. I am with
so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will
pardon praise from an old man, but you are blessed in your wife." I
would listen to him go on praising Mina for a day, so I simply nodded
and stood silent.

"She is one of God's women, fashioned by His own hand to show us men and
other women that there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its
light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an
egoist--and that, let me tell you, is much in this age, so sceptical and
selfish. And you, sir--I have read all the letters to poor Miss Lucy,
and some of them speak of you, so I know you since some days from the
knowing of others; but I have seen your true self since last night. You
will give me your hand, will you not? And let us be friends for all our
lives."

We shook hands, and he was so earnest and so kind that it made me quite
choky.

"And now," he said, "may I ask you for some more help? I have a great
task to do, and at the beginning it is to know. You can help me here.
Can you tell me what went before your going to Transylvania? Later on I
may ask more help, and of a different kind; but at first this will do."

"Look here, sir," I said, "does what you have to do concern the Count?"

"It does," he said solemnly.

"Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the 10:30 train, you
will not have time to read them; but I shall get the bundle of papers.
You can take them with you and read them in the train."

After breakfast I saw him to the station. When we were parting he
said:--

"Perhaps you will come to town if I send to you, and take Madam Mina
too."

"We shall both come when you will," I said.

I had got him the morning papers and the London papers of the previous
night, and while we were talking at the carriage window, waiting for the
train to start, he was turning them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to
catch something in one of them, "The Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by
the colour--and he grew quite white. He read something intently,
groaning to himself: "Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! so soon!" I do not
think he remembered me at the moment. Just then the whistle blew, and
the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and he leaned out of
the window and waved his hand, calling out: "Love to Madam Mina; I shall
write so soon as ever I can."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_26 September._--Truly there is no such thing as finality. Not a week
since I said "Finis," and yet here I am starting fresh again, or rather
going on with the same record. Until this afternoon I had no cause to
think of what is done. Renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as
he ever was. He was already well ahead with his fly business; and he had
just started in the spider line also; so he had not been of any trouble
to me. I had a letter from Arthur, written on Sunday, and from it I
gather that he is bearing up wonderfully well. Quincey Morris is with
him, and that is much of a help, for he himself is a bubbling well of
good spirits. Quincey wrote me a line too, and from him I hear that
Arthur is beginning to recover something of his old buoyancy; so as to
them all my mind is at rest. As for myself, I was settling down to my
work with the enthusiasm which I used to have for it, so that I might
fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming
cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be the
end God only knows. I have an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows,
too, but he will only let out enough at a time to whet curiosity. He
went to Exeter yesterday, and stayed there all night. To-day he came
back, and almost bounded into the room at about half-past five o'clock,
and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand.

"What do you think of that?" he asked as he stood back and folded his
arms.

I looked over the paper, for I really did not know what he meant; but he
took it from me and pointed out a paragraph about children being decoyed
away at Hampstead. It did not convey much to me, until I reached a
passage where it described small punctured wounds on their throats. An
idea struck me, and I looked up. "Well?" he said.

"It is like poor Lucy's."

"And what do you make of it?"

"Simply that there is some cause in common. Whatever it was that injured
her has injured them." I did not quite understand his answer:--

"That is true indirectly, but not directly."

"How do you mean, Professor?" I asked. I was a little inclined to take
his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and freedom
from burning, harrowing anxiety does help to restore one's spirits--but
when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the midst of our
despair about poor Lucy, had he looked more stern.

"Tell me!" I said. "I can hazard no opinion. I do not know what to
think, and I have no data on which to found a conjecture."

"Do you mean to tell me, friend John, that you have no suspicion as to
what poor Lucy died of; not after all the hints given, not only by
events, but by me?"

"Of nervous prostration following on great loss or waste of blood."

"And how the blood lost or waste?" I shook my head. He stepped over and
sat down beside me, and went on:--

"You are clever man, friend John; you reason well, and your wit is bold;
but you are too prejudiced. You do not let your eyes see nor your ears
hear, and that which is outside your daily life is not of account to
you. Do you not think that there are things which you cannot understand,
and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But
there are things old and new which must not be contemplate by men's
eyes, because they know--or think they know--some things which other men
have told them. Ah, it is the fault of our science that it wants to
explain all; and if it explain not, then it says there is nothing to
explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of new beliefs,
which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend
to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not
believe in corporeal transference. No? Nor in materialisation. No? Nor
in astral bodies. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in
hypnotism----"

"Yes," I said. "Charcot has proved that pretty well." He smiled as he
went on: "Then you are satisfied as to it. Yes? And of course then you
understand how it act, and can follow the mind of the great
Charcot--alas that he is no more!--into the very soul of the patient
that he influence. No? Then, friend John, am I to take it that you
simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion
be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you
accept the hypnotism and reject the thought reading. Let me tell you, my
friend, that there are things done to-day in electrical science which
would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered
electricity--who would themselves not so long before have been burned
as wizards. There are always mysteries in life. Why was it that
Methuselah lived nine hundred years, and 'Old Parr' one hundred and
sixty-nine, and yet that poor Lucy, with four men's blood in her poor
veins, could not live even one day? For, had she live one more day, we
could have save her. Do you know all the mystery of life and death? Do
you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the
qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in others? Can you tell me
why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived
for centuries in the tower of the old Spanish church and grew and grew,
till, on descending, he could drink the oil of all the church lamps? Can
you tell me why in the Pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are bats that
come at night and open the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their
veins; how in some islands of the Western seas there are bats which hang
on the trees all day, and those who have seen describe as like giant
nuts or pods, and that when the sailors sleep on the deck, because that
it is hot, flit down on them, and then--and then in the morning are
found dead men, white as even Miss Lucy was?"

"Good God, Professor!" I said, starting up. "Do you mean to tell me that
Lucy was bitten by such a bat; and that such a thing is here in London
in the nineteenth century?" He waved his hand for silence, and went
on:--

"Can you tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of
men; why the elephant goes on and on till he have seen dynasties; and
why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint?
Can you tell me why men believe in all ages and places that there are
some few who live on always if they be permit; that there are men and
women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for the
fact--that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of
years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of
the world. Can you tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die
and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and the
corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then men
come and take away the unbroken seal and that there lie the Indian
fakir, not dead, but that rise up and walk amongst them as before?" Here
I interrupted him. I was getting bewildered; he so crowded on my mind
his list of nature's eccentricities and possible impossibilities that my
imagination was getting fired. I had a dim idea that he was teaching me
some lesson, as long ago he used to do in his study at Amsterdam; but
he used then to tell me the thing, so that I could have the object of
thought in mind all the time. But now I was without this help, yet I
wanted to follow him, so I said:--

"Professor, let me be your pet student again. Tell me the thesis, so
that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am going in
my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follows an
idea. I feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping
from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without
knowing where I am going."

"That is good image," he said. "Well, I shall tell you. My thesis is
this: I want you to believe."

"To believe what?"

"To believe in things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once
of an American who so defined faith: 'that faculty which enables us to
believe things which we know to be untrue.' For one, I follow that man.
He meant that we shall have an open mind, and not let a little bit of
truth check the rush of a big truth, like a small rock does a railway
truck. We get the small truth first. Good! We keep him, and we value
him; but all the same we must not let him think himself all the truth in
the universe."

"Then you want me not to let some previous conviction injure the
receptivity of my mind with regard to some strange matter. Do I read
your lesson aright?"

"Ah, you are my favourite pupil still. It is worth to teach you. Now
that you are willing to understand, you have taken the first step to
understand. You think then that those so small holes in the children's
throats were made by the same that made the hole in Miss Lucy?"

"I suppose so." He stood up and said solemnly:--

"Then you are wrong. Oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It is worse,
far, far worse."

"In God's name, Professor Van Helsing, what do you mean?" I cried.

He threw himself with a despairing gesture into a chair, and placed his
elbows on the table, covering his face with his hands as he spoke:--

"They were made by Miss Lucy!"




CHAPTER XV

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_.


For a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as if he had during her life
struck Lucy on the face. I smote the table hard and rose up as I said to
him:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?" He raised his head and looked at me, and
somehow the tenderness of his face calmed me at once. "Would I were!" he
said. "Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this. Oh, my
friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell
you so simple a thing? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all
my life? Was it because I wished to give you pain? Was it that I wanted,
now so late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a
fearful death? Ah no!"

"Forgive me," said I. He went on:--

"My friend, it was because I wished to be gentle in the breaking to you,
for I know you have loved that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not
expect you to believe. It is so hard to accept at once any abstract
truth, that we may doubt such to be possible when we have always
believed the 'no' of it; it is more hard still to accept so sad a
concrete truth, and of such a one as Miss Lucy. To-night I go to prove
it. Dare you come with me?"

This staggered me. A man does not like to prove such a truth; Byron
excepted from the category, jealousy.

    "And prove the very truth he most abhorred."

He saw my hesitation, and spoke:--

"The logic is simple, no madman's logic this time, jumping from tussock
to tussock in a misty bog. If it be not true, then proof will be relief;
at worst it will not harm. If it be true! Ah, there is the dread; yet
very dread should help my cause, for in it is some need of belief. Come,
I tell you what I propose: first, that we go off now and see that child
in the hospital. Dr. Vincent, of the North Hospital, where the papers
say the child is, is friend of mine, and I think of yours since you were
in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he
will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we
wish to learn. And then----"

"And then?" He took a key from his pocket and held it up. "And then we
spend the night, you and I, in the churchyard where Lucy lies. This is
the key that lock the tomb. I had it from the coffin-man to give to
Arthur." My heart sank within me, for I felt that there was some fearful
ordeal before us. I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what
heart I could and said that we had better hasten, as the afternoon was
passing....

We found the child awake. It had had a sleep and taken some food, and
altogether was going on well. Dr. Vincent took the bandage from its
throat, and showed us the punctures. There was no mistaking the
similarity to those which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller,
and the edges looked fresher; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he
attributed them, and he replied that it must have been a bite of some
animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own part, he was inclined to think
that it was one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern
heights of London. "Out of so many harmless ones," he said, "there may
be some wild specimen from the South of a more malignant species. Some
sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to escape; or even from
the Zoölogical Gardens a young one may have got loose, or one be bred
there from a vampire. These things do occur, you know. Only ten days ago
a wolf got out, and was, I believe, traced up in this direction. For a
week after, the children were playing nothing but Red Riding Hood on the
Heath and in every alley in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare
came along, since when it has been quite a gala-time with them. Even
this poor little mite, when he woke up to-day, asked the nurse if he
might go away. When she asked him why he wanted to go, he said he wanted
to play with the 'bloofer lady.'"

"I hope," said Van Helsing, "that when you are sending the child home
you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. These fancies
to stray are most dangerous; and if the child were to remain out another
night, it would probably be fatal. But in any case I suppose you will
not let it away for some days?"

"Certainly not, not for a week at least; longer if the wound is not
healed."

Our visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and
the sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing saw how dark it
was, he said:--

"There is no hurry. It is more late than I thought. Come, let us seek
somewhere that we may eat, and then we shall go on our way."

We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little crowd of
bicyclists and others who were genially noisy. About ten o'clock we
started from the inn. It was then very dark, and the scattered lamps
made the darkness greater when we were once outside their individual
radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to go, for he
went on unhesitatingly; but, as for me, I was in quite a mixup as to
locality. As we went further, we met fewer and fewer people, till at
last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the patrol of horse
police going their usual suburban round. At last we reached the wall of
the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for
it was very dark, and the whole place seemed so strange to us--we found
the Westenra tomb. The Professor took the key, opened the creaky door,
and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to
precede him. There was a delicious irony in the offer, in the
courtliness of giving preference on such a ghastly occasion. My
companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after
carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a spring,
one. In the latter case we should have been in a bad plight. Then he
fumbled in his bag, and taking out a matchbox and a piece of candle,
proceeded to make a light. The tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed
with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some
days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites
turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the
beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured
stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished
brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a
candle, the effect was more miserable and sordid than could have been
imagined. It conveyed irresistibly the idea that life--animal life--was
not the only thing which could pass away.

Van Helsing went about his work systematically. Holding his candle so
that he could read the coffin plates, and so holding it that the sperm
dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he
made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, and he took
out a turnscrew.

"What are you going to do?" I asked.

"To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced." Straightway he began
taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the
casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for me. It seemed
to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been to have
stripped off her clothing in her sleep whilst living; I actually took
hold of his hand to stop him. He only said: "You shall see," and again
fumbling in his bag, took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew
through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, he
made a small hole, which was, however, big enough to admit the point of
the saw. I had expected a rush of gas from the week-old corpse. We
doctors, who have had to study our dangers, have to become accustomed to
such things, and I drew back towards the door. But the Professor never
stopped for a moment; he sawed down a couple of feet along one side of
the lead coffin, and then across, and down the other side. Taking the
edge of the loose flange, he bent it back towards the foot of the
coffin, and holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to
look.

I drew near and looked. The coffin was empty.

It was certainly a surprise to me, and gave me a considerable shock, but
Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now more sure than ever of his ground,
and so emboldened to proceed in his task. "Are you satisfied now, friend
John?" he asked.

I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as
I answered him:--

"I am satisfied that Lucy's body is not in that coffin; but that only
proves one thing."

"And what is that, friend John?"

"That it is not there."

"That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how
can you--account for it not being there?"

"Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people
may have stolen it." I felt that I was speaking folly, and yet it was
the only real cause which I could suggest. The Professor sighed. "Ah
well!" he said, "we must have more proof. Come with me."

He put on the coffin-lid again, gathered up all his things and placed
them in the bag, blew out the light, and placed the candle also in the
bag. We opened the door, and went out. Behind us he closed the door and
locked it. He handed me the key, saying: "Will you keep it? You had
better be assured." I laughed--it was not a very cheerful laugh, I am
bound to say--as I motioned him to keep it. "A key is nothing," I said;
"there may be duplicates; and anyhow it is not difficult to pick a lock
of that kind." He said nothing, but put the key in his pocket. Then he
told me to watch at one side of the churchyard whilst he would watch at
the other. I took up my place behind a yew-tree, and I saw his dark
figure move until the intervening headstones and trees hid it from my
sight.

It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken my place I heard a distant
clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and
unnerved, and angry with the Professor for taking me on such an errand
and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly
observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had
a dreary, miserable time.

Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I saw something like a white
streak, moving between two dark yew-trees at the side of the churchyard
farthest from the tomb; at the same time a dark mass moved from the
Professor's side of the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I
too moved; but I had to go round headstones and railed-off tombs, and I
stumbled over graves. The sky was overcast, and somewhere far off an
early cock crew. A little way off, beyond a line of scattered
juniper-trees, which marked the pathway to the church, a white, dim
figure flitted in the direction of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden
by trees, and I could not see where the figure disappeared. I heard the
rustle of actual movement where I had first seen the white figure, and
coming over, found the Professor holding in his arms a tiny child. When
he saw me he held it out to me, and said:--

"Are you satisfied now?"

"No," I said, in a way that I felt was aggressive.

"Do you not see the child?"

"Yes, it is a child, but who brought it here? And is it wounded?" I
asked.

"We shall see," said the Professor, and with one impulse we took our way
out of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child.

When we had got some little distance away, we went into a clump of
trees, and struck a match, and looked at the child's throat. It was
without a scratch or scar of any kind.

"Was I right?" I asked triumphantly.

"We were just in time," said the Professor thankfully.

We had now to decide what we were to do with the child, and so consulted
about it. If we were to take it to a police-station we should have to
give some account of our movements during the night; at least, we should
have had to make some statement as to how we had come to find the child.
So finally we decided that we would take it to the Heath, and when we
heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not fail to find
it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as we could. All fell out
well. At the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman's heavy
tramp, and laying the child on the pathway, we waited and watched until
he saw it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclamation
of astonishment, and then we went away silently. By good chance we got a
cab near the "Spaniards," and drove to town.

I cannot sleep, so I make this entry. But I must try to get a few hours'
sleep, as Van Helsing is to call for me at noon. He insists that I shall
go with him on another expedition.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 September._--It was two o'clock before we found a suitable
opportunity for our attempt. The funeral held at noon was all completed,
and the last stragglers of the mourners had taken themselves lazily
away, when, looking carefully from behind a clump of alder-trees, we saw
the sexton lock the gate after him. We knew then that we were safe till
morning did we desire it; but the Professor told me that we should not
want more than an hour at most. Again I felt that horrid sense of the
reality of things, in which any effort of imagination seemed out of
place; and I realised distinctly the perils of the law which we were
incurring in our unhallowed work. Besides, I felt it was all so useless.
Outrageous as it was to open a leaden coffin, to see if a woman dead
nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed the height of folly to
open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evidence of our own
eyesight, that the coffin was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however,
and rested silent, for Van Helsing had a way of going on his own road,
no matter who remonstrated. He took the key, opened the vault, and again
courteously motioned me to precede. The place was not so gruesome as
last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine
streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy's coffin, and I followed.
He bent over and again forced back the leaden flange; and then a shock
of surprise and dismay shot through me.

There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her the night before her
funeral. She was, if possible, more radiantly beautiful than ever; and I
could not believe that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than
before; and on the cheeks was a delicate bloom.

"Is this a juggle?" I said to him.

"Are you convinced now?" said the Professor in response, and as he spoke
he put over his hand, and in a way that made me shudder, pulled back the
dead lips and showed the white teeth.

"See," he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. With this
and this"--and he touched one of the canine teeth and that below
it--"the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend
John?" Once more, argumentative hostility woke within me. I _could_ not
accept such an overwhelming idea as he suggested; so, with an attempt to
argue of which I was even at the moment ashamed, I said:--

"She may have been placed here since last night."

"Indeed? That is so, and by whom?"

"I do not know. Some one has done it."

"And yet she has been dead one week. Most peoples in that time would not
look so." I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not
seem to notice my silence; at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor
triumph. He was looking intently at the face of the dead woman, raising
the eyelids and looking at the eyes, and once more opening the lips and
examining the teeth. Then he turned to me and said:--

"Here, there is one thing which is different from all recorded; here is
some dual life that is not as the common. She was bitten by the vampire
when she was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not know
that, friend John, but you shall know it all later--and in trance could
he best come to take more blood. In trance she died, and in trance she
is Un-Dead, too. So it is that she differ from all other. Usually when
the Un-Dead sleep at home"--as he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of
his arm to designate what to a vampire was "home"--"their face show what
they are, but this so sweet that was when she not Un-Dead she go back to
the nothings of the common dead. There is no malign there, see, and so
it make hard that I must kill her in her sleep." This turned my blood
cold, and it began to dawn upon me that I was accepting Van Helsing's
theories; but if she were really dead, what was there of terror in the
idea of killing her? He looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in
my face, for he said almost joyously:--

"Ah, you believe now?"

I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I am willing to
accept. How will you do this bloody work?"

"I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall
drive a stake through her body." It made me shudder to think of so
mutilating the body of the woman whom I had loved. And yet the feeling
was not so strong as I had expected. I was, in fact, beginning to
shudder at the presence of this being, this Un-Dead, as Van Helsing
called it, and to loathe it. Is it possible that love is all subjective,
or all objective?

I waited a considerable time for Van Helsing to begin, but he stood as
if wrapped in thought. Presently he closed the catch of his bag with a
snap, and said:--

"I have been thinking, and have made up my mind as to what is best. If I
did simply follow my inclining I would do now, at this moment, what is
to be done; but there are other things to follow, and things that are
thousand times more difficult in that them we do not know. This is
simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act
now would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may have to
want Arthur, and how shall we tell him of this? If you, who saw the
wounds on Lucy's throat, and saw the wounds so similar on the child's at
the hospital; if you, who saw the coffin empty last night and full
to-day with a woman who have not change only to be more rose and more
beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this and know
of the white figure last night that brought the child to the churchyard,
and yet of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect
Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I
took him from her kiss when she was dying. I know he has forgiven me
because in some mistaken idea I have done things that prevent him say
good-bye as he ought; and he may think that in some more mistaken idea
this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have
killed her. He will then argue back that it is we, mistaken ones, that
have killed her by our ideas; and so he will be much unhappy always. Yet
he never can be sure; and that is the worst of all. And he will
sometimes think that she he loved was buried alive, and that will paint
his dreams with horrors of what she must have suffered; and again, he
will think that we may be right, and that his so beloved was, after all,
an Un-Dead. No! I told him once, and since then I learn much. Now, since
I know it is all true, a hundred thousand times more do I know that he
must pass through the bitter waters to reach the sweet. He, poor fellow,
must have one hour that will make the very face of heaven grow black to
him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is
made up. Let us go. You return home for to-night to your asylum, and see
that all be well. As for me, I shall spend the night here in this
churchyard in my own way. To-morrow night you will come to me to the
Berkeley Hotel at ten of the clock. I shall send for Arthur to come too,
and also that so fine young man of America that gave his blood. Later we
shall all have work to do. I come with you so far as Piccadilly and
there dine, for I must be back here before the sun set."

So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the
churchyard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly.


_Note left by Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to
John Seward, M. D._

(Not delivered.)

"_27 September._

"Friend John,--

"I write this in case anything should happen. I go alone to watch in
that churchyard. It pleases me that the Un-Dead, Miss Lucy, shall not
leave to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more eager.
Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a
crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. She is young as Un-Dead,
and will heed. Moreover, these are only to prevent her coming out; they
may not prevail on her wanting to get in; for then the Un-Dead is
desperate, and must find the line of least resistance, whatsoever it may
be. I shall be at hand all the night from sunset till after the sunrise,
and if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn it. For Miss
Lucy or from her, I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that
she is Un-Dead, he have now the power to seek her tomb and find shelter.
He is cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the way that all
along he have fooled us when he played with us for Miss Lucy's life, and
we lost; and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the
strength in his hand of twenty men; even we four who gave our strength
to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf and
I know not what. So if it be that he come thither on this night he shall
find me; but none other shall--until it be too late. But it may be that
he will not attempt the place. There is no reason why he should; his
hunting ground is more full of game than the churchyard where the
Un-Dead woman sleep, and the one old man watch.

"Therefore I write this in case.... Take the papers that are with this,
the diaries of Harker and the rest, and read them, and then find this
great Un-Dead, and cut off his head and burn his heart or drive a stake
through it, so that the world may rest from him.

"If it be so, farewell.

"VAN HELSING."



_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_28 September._--It is wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for
one. Yesterday I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's monstrous
ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on
common sense. I have no doubt that he believes it all. I wonder if his
mind can have become in any way unhinged. Surely there must be _some_
rational explanation of all these mysterious things. Is it possible that
the Professor can have done it himself? He is so abnormally clever that
if he went off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to
some fixed idea in a wonderful way. I am loath to think it, and indeed
it would be almost as great a marvel as the other to find that Van
Helsing was mad; but anyhow I shall watch him carefully. I may get some
light on the mystery.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 September, morning._.... Last night, at a little before ten o'clock,
Arthur and Quincey came into Van Helsing's room; he told us all that he
wanted us to do, but especially addressing himself to Arthur, as if all
our wills were centred in his. He began by saying that he hoped we would
all come with him too, "for," he said, "there is a grave duty to be done
there. You were doubtless surprised at my letter?" This query was
directly addressed to Lord Godalming.

"I was. It rather upset me for a bit. There has been so much trouble
around my house of late that I could do without any more. I have been
curious, too, as to what you mean. Quincey and I talked it over; but the
more we talked, the more puzzled we got, till now I can say for myself
that I'm about up a tree as to any meaning about anything."

"Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically.

"Oh," said the Professor, "then you are nearer the beginning, both of
you, than friend John here, who has to go a long way back before he can
even get so far as to begin."

It was evident that he recognised my return to my old doubting frame of
mind without my saying a word. Then, turning to the other two, he said
with intense gravity:--

"I want your permission to do what I think good this night. It is, I
know, much to ask; and when you know what it is I propose to do you will
know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask that you promise me
in the dark, so that afterwards, though you may be angry with me for a
time--I must not disguise from myself the possibility that such may
be--you shall not blame yourselves for anything."

"That's frank anyhow," broke in Quincey. "I'll answer for the Professor.
I don't quite see his drift, but I swear he's honest; and that's good
enough for me."

"I thank you, sir," said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the
honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear
to me." He held out a hand, which Quincey took.

Then Arthur spoke out:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they
say in Scotland, and if it be anything in which my honour as a gentleman
or my faith as a Christian is concerned, I cannot make such a promise.
If you can assure me that what you intend does not violate either of
these two, then I give my consent at once; though for the life of me, I
cannot understand what you are driving at."

"I accept your limitation," said Van Helsing, "and all I ask of you is
that if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will first
consider it well and be satisfied that it does not violate your
reservations."

"Agreed!" said Arthur; "that is only fair. And now that the
_pourparlers_ are over, may I ask what it is we are to do?"

"I want you to come with me, and to come in secret, to the churchyard at
Kingstead."

Arthur's face fell as he said in an amazed sort of way:--

"Where poor Lucy is buried?" The Professor bowed. Arthur went on: "And
when there?"

"To enter the tomb!" Arthur stood up.

"Professor, are you in earnest; or it is some monstrous joke? Pardon me,
I see that you are in earnest." He sat down again, but I could see that
he sat firmly and proudly, as one who is on his dignity. There was
silence until he asked again:--

"And when in the tomb?"

"To open the coffin."

"This is too much!" he said, angrily rising again. "I am willing to be
patient in all things that are reasonable; but in this--this desecration
of the grave--of one who----" He fairly choked with indignation. The
Professor looked pityingly at him.

"If I could spare you one pang, my poor friend," he said, "God knows I
would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and
for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!"

Arthur looked up with set white face and said:--

"Take care, sir, take care!"

"Would it not be well to hear what I have to say?" said Van Helsing.
"And then you will at least know the limit of my purpose. Shall I go
on?"

"That's fair enough," broke in Morris.

After a pause Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:--

"Miss Lucy is dead; is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no wrong to
her. But if she be not dead----"

Arthur jumped to his feet.

"Good God!" he cried. "What do you mean? Has there been any mistake; has
she been buried alive?" He groaned in anguish that not even hope could
soften.

"I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not think it. I go no
further than to say that she might be Un-Dead."

"Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what
is it?"

"There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they
may solve only in part. Believe me, we are now on the verge of one. But
I have not done. May I cut off the head of dead Miss Lucy?"

"Heavens and earth, no!" cried Arthur in a storm of passion. "Not for
the wide world will I consent to any mutilation of her dead body. Dr.
Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done to you that you should
torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to
cast such dishonour on her grave? Are you mad that speak such things, or
am I mad to listen to them? Don't dare to think more of such a
desecration; I shall not give my consent to anything you do. I have a
duty to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by God, I shall do
it!"

Van Helsing rose up from where he had all the time been seated, and
said, gravely and sternly:--

"My Lord Godalming, I, too, have a duty to do, a duty to others, a duty
to you, a duty to the dead; and, by God, I shall do it! All I ask you
now is that you come with me, that you look and listen; and if when
later I make the same request you do not be more eager for its
fulfilment even than I am, then--then I shall do my duty, whatever it
may seem to me. And then, to follow of your Lordship's wishes I shall
hold myself at your disposal to render an account to you, when and where
you will." His voice broke a little, and he went on with a voice full of
pity:--

"But, I beseech you, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of
acts which were often not pleasant to do, and which sometimes did wring
my heart, I have never had so heavy a task as now. Believe me that if
the time comes for you to change your mind towards me, one look from
you will wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do what a man can
to save you from sorrow. Just think. For why should I give myself so
much of labour and so much of sorrow? I have come here from my own land
to do what I can of good; at the first to please my friend John, and
then to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to love. For her--I
am ashamed to say so much, but I say it in kindness--I gave what you
gave; the blood of my veins; I gave it, I, who was not, like you, her
lover, but only her physician and her friend. I gave to her my nights
and days--before death, after death; and if my death can do her good
even now, when she is the dead Un-Dead, she shall have it freely." He
said this with a very grave, sweet pride, and Arthur was much affected
by it. He took the old man's hand and said in a broken voice:--

"Oh, it is hard to think of it, and I cannot understand; but at least I
shall go with you and wait."




CHAPTER XVI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_


It was just a quarter before twelve o'clock when we got into the
churchyard over the low wall. The night was dark with occasional gleams
of moonlight between the rents of the heavy clouds that scudded across
the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing slightly
in front as he led the way. When we had come close to the tomb I looked
well at Arthur, for I feared that the proximity to a place laden with so
sorrowful a memory would upset him; but he bore himself well. I took it
that the very mystery of the proceeding was in some way a counteractant
to his grief. The Professor unlocked the door, and seeing a natural
hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved the difficulty by
entering first himself. The rest of us followed, and he closed the door.
He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to the coffin. Arthur stepped
forward hesitatingly; Van Helsing said to me:--

"You were with me here yesterday. Was the body of Miss Lucy in that
coffin?"

"It was." The Professor turned to the rest saying:--

"You hear; and yet there is no one who does not believe with me." He
took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin. Arthur
looked on, very pale but silent; when the lid was removed he stepped
forward. He evidently did not know that there was a leaden coffin, or,
at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw the rent in the lead,
the blood rushed to his face for an instant, but as quickly fell away
again, so that he remained of a ghastly whiteness; he was still silent.
Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and
recoiled.

The coffin was empty!

For several minutes no one spoke a word. The silence was broken by
Quincey Morris:--

"Professor, I answered for you. Your word is all I want. I wouldn't ask
such a thing ordinarily--I wouldn't so dishonour you as to imply a
doubt; but this is a mystery that goes beyond any honour or dishonour.
Is this your doing?"

"I swear to you by all that I hold sacred that I have not removed nor
touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and
I came here--with good purpose, believe me. I opened that coffin, which
was then sealed up, and we found it, as now, empty. We then waited, and
saw something white come through the trees. The next day we came here in
day-time, and she lay there. Did she not, friend John?"

"Yes."

"That night we were just in time. One more so small child was missing,
and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst the graves. Yesterday I came
here before sundown, for at sundown the Un-Dead can move. I waited here
all the night till the sun rose, but I saw nothing. It was most probable
that it was because I had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic,
which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. Last
night there was no exodus, so to-night before the sundown I took away my
garlic and other things. And so it is we find this coffin empty. But
bear with me. So far there is much that is strange. Wait you with me
outside, unseen and unheard, and things much stranger are yet to be.
So"--here he shut the dark slide of his lantern--"now to the outside."
He opened the door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking the
door behind him.

Oh! but it seemed fresh and pure in the night air after the terror of
that vault. How sweet it was to see the clouds race by, and the passing
gleams of the moonlight between the scudding clouds crossing and
passing--like the gladness and sorrow of a man's life; how sweet it was
to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how
humanising to see the red lighting of the sky beyond the hill, and to
hear far away the muffled roar that marks the life of a great city. Each
in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I
could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning of the
mystery. I was myself tolerably patient, and half inclined again to
throw aside doubt and to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey
Morris was phlegmatic in the way of a man who accepts all things, and
accepts them in the spirit of cool bravery, with hazard of all he has to
stake. Not being able to smoke, he cut himself a good-sized plug of
tobacco and began to chew. As to Van Helsing, he was employed in a
definite way. First he took from his bag a mass of what looked like
thin, wafer-like biscuit, which was carefully rolled up in a white
napkin; next he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like
dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the
mass between his hands. This he then took, and rolling it into thin
strips, began to lay them into the crevices between the door and its
setting in the tomb. I was somewhat puzzled at this, and being close,
asked him what it was that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey drew near
also, as they too were curious. He answered:--

"I am closing the tomb, so that the Un-Dead may not enter."

"And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked Quincey.
"Great Scott! Is this a game?"

"It is."

"What is that which you are using?" This time the question was by
Arthur. Van Helsing reverently lifted his hat as he answered:--

"The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an Indulgence." It was an
answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and we felt individually
that in the presence of such earnest purpose as the Professor's, a
purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of things, it was
impossible to distrust. In respectful silence we took the places
assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of any
one approaching. I pitied the others, especially Arthur. I had myself
been apprenticed by my former visits to this watching horror; and yet I,
who had up to an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart sink
within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or
yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree
or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so
mysteriously; and never did the far-away howling of dogs send such a
woeful presage through the night.

There was a long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the
Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the avenue of yews
we saw a white figure advance--a dim white figure, which held something
dark at its breast. The figure stopped, and at the moment a ray of
moonlight fell upon the masses of driving clouds and showed in startling
prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of the grave.
We could not see the face, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a
fair-haired child. There was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a
child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and dreams. We
were starting forward, but the Professor's warning hand, seen by us as
he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the
white figure moved forwards again. It was now near enough for us to see
clearly, and the moonlight still held. My own heart grew cold as ice,
and I could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features of
Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was
turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous
wantonness. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we
all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door of the
tomb. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the slide; by the
concentrated light that fell on Lucy's face we could see that the lips
were crimson with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her
chin and stained the purity of her lawn death-robe.

We shuddered with horror. I could see by the tremulous light that even
Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and if I had
not seized his arm and held him up, he would have fallen.

When Lucy--I call the thing that was before us Lucy because it bore her
shape--saw us she drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives
when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form
and colour; but Lucy's eyes unclean and full of hell-fire, instead of
the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment the remnant of my love
passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have
done it with savage delight. As she looked, her eyes blazed with unholy
light, and the face became wreathed with a voluptuous smile. Oh, God,
how it made me shudder to see it! With a careless motion, she flung to
the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to now she had
clutched strenuously to her breast, growling over it as a dog growls
over a bone. The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning. There
was a cold-bloodedness in the act which wrung a groan from Arthur; when
she advanced to him with outstretched arms and a wanton smile he fell
back and hid his face in his hands.

She still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace,
said:--

"Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My arms are
hungry for you. Come, and we can rest together. Come, my husband, come!"

There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the
tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the brains even of us
who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he seemed under
a spell; moving his hands from his face, he opened wide his arms. She
was leaping for them, when Van Helsing sprang forward and held between
them his little golden crucifix. She recoiled from it, and, with a
suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter
the tomb.

When within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if
arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face was
shown in the clear burst of moonlight and by the lamp, which had now no
quiver from Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I see such baffled
malice on a face; and never, I trust, shall such ever be seen again by
mortal eyes. The beautiful colour became livid, the eyes seemed to throw
out sparks of hell-fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the folds of
the flesh were the coils of Medusa's snakes, and the lovely,
blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the passion masks of
the Greeks and Japanese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could
kill--we saw it at that moment.

And so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained
between the lifted crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of
entry. Van Helsing broke the silence by asking Arthur:--

"Answer me, oh my friend! Am I to proceed in my work?"

Arthur threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he
answered:--

"Do as you will, friend; do as you will. There can be no horror like
this ever any more;" and he groaned in spirit. Quincey and I
simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms. We could hear the
click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing held it down; coming close
to the tomb, he began to remove from the chinks some of the sacred
emblem which he had placed there. We all looked on in horrified
amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, with a corporeal
body as real at that moment as our own, pass in through the interstice
where scarce a knife-blade could have gone. We all felt a glad sense of
relief when we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty
to the edges of the door.

When this was done, he lifted the child and said:

"Come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. There is a
funeral at noon, so here we shall all come before long after that. The
friends of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the sexton lock
the gate we shall remain. Then there is more to do; but not like this of
to-night. As for this little one, he is not much harm, and by to-morrow
night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the police will find
him, as on the other night; and then to home." Coming close to Arthur,
he said:--

"My friend Arthur, you have had a sore trial; but after, when you look
back, you will see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter
waters, my child. By this time to-morrow you will, please God, have
passed them, and have drunk of the sweet waters; so do not mourn
overmuch. Till then I shall not ask you to forgive me."

Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and we tried to cheer each other
on the way. We had left the child in safety, and were tired; so we all
slept with more or less reality of sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 September, night._--A little before twelve o'clock we three--Arthur,
Quincey Morris, and myself--called for the Professor. It was odd to
notice that by common consent we had all put on black clothes. Of
course, Arthur wore black, for he was in deep mourning, but the rest of
us wore it by instinct. We got to the churchyard by half-past one, and
strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the
gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton under the belief
that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to
ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a
long leather one, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of
fair weight.

When we were alone and had heard the last of the footsteps die out up
the road, we silently, and as if by ordered intention, followed the
Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and we entered, closing it
behind us. Then he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also
two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own
ends, on other coffins, so that they might give light sufficient to work
by. When he again lifted the lid off Lucy's coffin we all looked--Arthur
trembling like an aspen--and saw that the body lay there in all its
death-beauty. But there was no love in my own heart, nothing but
loathing for the foul Thing which had taken Lucy's shape without her
soul. I could see even Arthur's face grow hard as he looked. Presently
he said to Van Helsing:--

"Is this really Lucy's body, or only a demon in her shape?"

"It is her body, and yet not it. But wait a while, and you all see her
as she was, and is."

She seemed like a nightmare of Lucy as she lay there; the pointed teeth,
the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to
see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a
devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with his usual
methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and
placing them ready for use. First he took out a soldering iron and some
plumbing solder, and then a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in
a corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue
flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a
round wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches thick and about
three feet long. One end of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and
was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such
as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To
me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and
bracing, but the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey was
to cause them a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their
courage, and remained silent and quiet.

When all was ready, Van Helsing said:--

"Before we do anything, let me tell you this; it is out of the lore and
experience of the ancients and of all those who have studied the powers
of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the
curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on age after age
adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world; for all that
die from the preying of the Un-Dead becomes themselves Un-Dead, and prey
on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the
ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had met
that kiss which you know of before poor Lucy die; or again, last night
when you open your arms to her, you would in time, when you had died,
have become _nosferatu_, as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would
all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror.
The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. Those
children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if
she live on, Un-Dead, more and more they lose their blood and by her
power over them they come to her; and so she draw their blood with that
so wicked mouth. But if she die in truth, then all cease; the tiny
wounds of the throats disappear, and they go back to their plays
unknowing ever of what has been. But of the most blessed of all, when
this now Un-Dead be made to rest as true dead, then the soul of the poor
lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by
night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she
shall take her place with the other Angels. So that, my friend, it will
be a blessed hand for her that shall strike the blow that sets her free.
To this I am willing; but is there none amongst us who has a better
right? Will it be no joy to think of hereafter in the silence of the
night when sleep is not: 'It was my hand that sent her to the stars; it
was the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that of all she would
herself have chosen, had it been to her to choose?' Tell me if there be
such a one amongst us?"

We all looked at Arthur. He saw, too, what we all did, the infinite
kindness which suggested that his should be the hand which would restore
Lucy to us as a holy, and not an unholy, memory; he stepped forward and
said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as
snow:--

"My true friend, from the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me
what I am to do, and I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand on his
shoulder, and said:--

"Brave lad! A moment's courage, and it is done. This stake must be
driven through her. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in
that--but it will be only a short time, and you will then rejoice more
than your pain was great; from this grim tomb you will emerge as though
you tread on air. But you must not falter when once you have begun. Only
think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we pray for
you all the time."

"Go on," said Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am to do."

"Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the
heart, and the hammer in your right. Then when we begin our prayer for
the dead--I shall read him, I have here the book, and the others shall
follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well with the dead that
we love and that the Un-Dead pass away."

Arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his mind was set on
action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. Van Helsing opened
his missal and began to read, and Quincey and I followed as well as we
could. Arthur placed the point over the heart, and as I looked I could
see its dint in the white flesh. Then he struck with all his might.

The Thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech
came from the opened red lips. The body shook and quivered and twisted
in wild contortions; the sharp white teeth champed together till the
lips were cut, and the mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur
never faltered. He looked like a figure of Thor as his untrembling arm
rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper the mercy-bearing stake, whilst
the blood from the pierced heart welled and spurted up around it. His
face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of it
gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring through the little
vault.

And then the writhing and quivering of the body became less, and the
teeth seemed to champ, and the face to quiver. Finally it lay still. The
terrible task was over.

The hammer fell from Arthur's hand. He reeled and would have fallen had
we not caught him. The great drops of sweat sprang from his forehead,
and his breath came in broken gasps. It had indeed been an awful strain
on him; and had he not been forced to his task by more than human
considerations he could never have gone through with it. For a few
minutes we were so taken up with him that we did not look towards the
coffin. When we did, however, a murmur of startled surprise ran from one
to the other of us. We gazed so eagerly that Arthur rose, for he had
been seated on the ground, and came and looked too; and then a glad,
strange light broke over his face and dispelled altogether the gloom of
horror that lay upon it.

There, in the coffin lay no longer the foul Thing that we had so dreaded
and grown to hate that the work of her destruction was yielded as a
privilege to the one best entitled to it, but Lucy as we had seen her in
her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that
there were there, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care and
pain and waste; but these were all dear to us, for they marked her truth
to what we knew. One and all we felt that the holy calm that lay like
sunshine over the wasted face and form was only an earthly token and
symbol of the calm that was to reign for ever.

Van Helsing came and laid his hand on Arthur's shoulder, and said to
him:--

"And now, Arthur my friend, dear lad, am I not forgiven?"

The reaction of the terrible strain came as he took the old man's hand
in his, and raising it to his lips, pressed it, and said:--

"Forgiven! God bless you that you have given my dear one her soul again,
and me peace." He put his hands on the Professor's shoulder, and laying
his head on his breast, cried for a while silently, whilst we stood
unmoving. When he raised his head Van Helsing said to him:--

"And now, my child, you may kiss her. Kiss her dead lips if you will, as
she would have you to, if for her to choose. For she is not a grinning
devil now--not any more a foul Thing for all eternity. No longer she is
the devil's Un-Dead. She is God's true dead, whose soul is with Him!"

Arthur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and Quincey out of the
tomb; the Professor and I sawed the top off the stake, leaving the point
of it in the body. Then we cut off the head and filled the mouth with
garlic. We soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin-lid,
and gathering up our belongings, came away. When the Professor locked
the door he gave the key to Arthur.

Outside the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it
seemed as if all nature were tuned to a different pitch. There was
gladness and mirth and peace everywhere, for we were at rest ourselves
on one account, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy.

Before we moved away Van Helsing said:--

"Now, my friends, one step of our work is done, one the most harrowing
to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the author
of all this our sorrow and to stamp him out. I have clues which we can
follow; but it is a long task, and a difficult, and there is danger in
it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all
of us--is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do
we not promise to go on to the bitter end?"

Each in turn, we took his hand, and the promise was made. Then said the
Professor as we moved off:--

"Two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine together at seven of
the clock with friend John. I shall entreat two others, two that you
know not as yet; and I shall be ready to all our work show and our plans
unfold. Friend John, you come with me home, for I have much to consult
about, and you can help me. To-night I leave for Amsterdam, but shall
return to-morrow night. And then begins our great quest. But first I
shall have much to say, so that you may know what is to do and to dread.
Then our promise shall be made to each other anew; for there is a
terrible task before us, and once our feet are on the ploughshare we
must not draw back."




CHAPTER XVII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_


When we arrived at the Berkeley Hotel, Van Helsing found a telegram
waiting for him:--

     "Am coming up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Important news.--MINA
     HARKER."

The Professor was delighted. "Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina," he said,
"pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot stay. She must go to your
house, friend John. You must meet her at the station. Telegraph her _en
route_, so that she may be prepared."

When the wire was despatched he had a cup of tea; over it he told me of
a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and gave me a typewritten
copy of it, as also of Mrs. Harker's diary at Whitby. "Take these," he
said, "and study them well. When I have returned you will be master of
all the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep
them safe, for there is in them much of treasure. You will need all your
faith, even you who have had such an experience as that of to-day. What
is here told," he laid his hand heavily and gravely on the packet of
papers as he spoke, "may be the beginning of the end to you and me and
many another; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead who walk the
earth. Read all, I pray you, with the open mind; and if you can add in
any way to the story here told do so, for it is all-important. You have
kept diary of all these so strange things; is it not so? Yes! Then we
shall go through all these together when we meet." He then made ready
for his departure, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool Street. I
took my way to Paddington, where I arrived about fifteen minutes before
the train came in.

The crowd melted away, after the bustling fashion common to arrival
platforms; and I was beginning to feel uneasy, lest I might miss my
guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty-looking girl stepped up to me, and,
after a quick glance, said: "Dr. Seward, is it not?"

"And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out
her hand.

"I knew you from the description of poor dear Lucy; but----" She stopped
suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face.

The blush that rose to my own cheeks somehow set us both at ease, for it
was a tacit answer to her own. I got her luggage, which included a
typewriter, and we took the Underground to Fenchurch Street, after I had
sent a wire to my housekeeper to have a sitting-room and bedroom
prepared at once for Mrs. Harker.

In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was a
lunatic asylum, but I could see that she was unable to repress a shudder
when we entered.

She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as
she had much to say. So here I am finishing my entry in my phonograph
diary whilst I await her. As yet I have not had the chance of looking at
the papers which Van Helsing left with me, though they lie open before
me. I must get her interested in something, so that I may have an
opportunity of reading them. She does not know how precious time is, or
what a task we have in hand. I must be careful not to frighten her. Here
she is!


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_29 September._--After I had tidied myself, I went down to Dr. Seward's
study. At the door I paused a moment, for I thought I heard him talking
with some one. As, however, he had pressed me to be quick, I knocked at
the door, and on his calling out, "Come in," I entered.

To my intense surprise, there was no one with him. He was quite alone,
and on the table opposite him was what I knew at once from the
description to be a phonograph. I had never seen one, and was much
interested.

"I hope I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door
as I heard you talking, and thought there was some one with you."

"Oh," he replied with a smile, "I was only entering my diary."

"Your diary?" I asked him in surprise.

"Yes," he answered. "I keep it in this." As he spoke he laid his hand on
the phonograph. I felt quite excited over it, and blurted out:--

"Why, this beats even shorthand! May I hear it say something?"

"Certainly," he replied with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train
for speaking. Then he paused, and a troubled look overspread his face.

"The fact is," he began awkwardly, "I only keep my diary in it; and as
it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be awkward--that
is, I mean----" He stopped, and I tried to help him out of his
embarrassment:--

"You helped to attend dear Lucy at the end. Let me hear how she died;
for all that I know of her, I shall be very grateful. She was very, very
dear to me."

To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face:--

"Tell you of her death? Not for the wide world!"

"Why not?" I asked, for some grave, terrible feeling was coming over me.
Again he paused, and I could see that he was trying to invent an excuse.
At length he stammered out:--

"You see, I do not know how to pick out any particular part of the
diary." Even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and he said
with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the naïveté
of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could
not but smile, at which he grimaced. "I gave myself away that time!" he
said. "But do you know that, although I have kept the diary for months
past, it never once struck me how I was going to find any particular
part of it in case I wanted to look it up?" By this time my mind was
made up that the diary of a doctor who attended Lucy might have
something to add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible Being, and
I said boldly:--

"Then, Dr. Seward, you had better let me copy it out for you on my
typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:--

"No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know that terrible
story!"

Then it was terrible; my intuition was right! For a moment I thought,
and as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or
some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on
the table. His eyes caught the look in mine, and, without his thinking,
followed their direction. As they saw the parcel he realised my meaning.

"You do not know me," I said. "When you have read those papers--my own
diary and my husband's also, which I have typed--you will know me
better. I have not faltered in giving every thought of my own heart in
this cause; but, of course, you do not know me--yet; and I must not
expect you to trust me so far."

He is certainly a man of noble nature; poor dear Lucy was right about
him. He stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were arranged in
order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and
said:--

"You are quite right. I did not trust you because I did not know you.
But I know you now; and let me say that I should have known you long
ago. I know that Lucy told you of me; she told me of you too. May I make
the only atonement in my power? Take the cylinders and hear them--the
first half-dozen of them are personal to me, and they will not horrify
you; then you will know me better. Dinner will by then be ready. In the
meantime I shall read over some of these documents, and shall be better
able to understand certain things." He carried the phonograph himself up
to my sitting-room and adjusted it for me. Now I shall learn something
pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me the other side of a true love
episode of which I know one side already....


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan
Harker and that other of his wife that I let the time run on without
thinking. Mrs. Harker was not down when the maid came to announce
dinner, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and
I went on with my work. I had just finished Mrs. Harker's diary, when
she came in. She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes were
flushed with crying. This somehow moved me much. Of late I have had
cause for tears, God knows! but the relief of them was denied me; and
now the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with recent tears, went
straight to my heart. So I said as gently as I could:--

"I greatly fear I have distressed you."

"Oh, no, not distressed me," she replied, "but I have been more touched
than I can say by your grief. That is a wonderful machine, but it is
cruelly true. It told me, in its very tones, the anguish of your heart.
It was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them
spoken ever again! See, I have tried to be useful. I have copied out the
words on my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as
I did."

"No one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in a low voice. She
laid her hand on mine and said very gravely:--

"Ah, but they must!"

"Must! But why?" I asked.

"Because it is a part of the terrible story, a part of poor dear Lucy's
death and all that led to it; because in the struggle which we have
before us to rid the earth of this terrible monster we must have all
the knowledge and all the help which we can get. I think that the
cylinders which you gave me contained more than you intended me to know;
but I can see that there are in your record many lights to this dark
mystery. You will let me help, will you not? I know all up to a certain
point; and I see already, though your diary only took me to 7 September,
how poor Lucy was beset, and how her terrible doom was being wrought
out. Jonathan and I have been working day and night since Professor Van
Helsing saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more information, and he
will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no secrets amongst us;
working together and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than
if some of us were in the dark." She looked at me so appealingly, and at
the same time manifested such courage and resolution in her bearing,
that I gave in at once to her wishes. "You shall," I said, "do as you
like in the matter. God forgive me if I do wrong! There are terrible
things yet to learn of; but if you have so far travelled on the road to
poor Lucy's death, you will not be content, I know, to remain in the
dark. Nay, the end--the very end--may give you a gleam of peace. Come,
there is dinner. We must keep one another strong for what is before us;
we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn
the rest, and I shall answer any questions you ask--if there be anything
which you do not understand, though it was apparent to us who were
present."


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to his study. He
brought back the phonograph from my room, and I took my typewriter. He
placed me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I
could touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in case
I should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his
back to me, so that I might be as free as possible, and began to read. I
put the forked metal to my ears and listened.

When the terrible story of Lucy's death, and--and all that followed, was
done, I lay back in my chair powerless. Fortunately I am not of a
fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a
horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a
cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few minutes somewhat restored
me. My brain was all in a whirl, and only that there came through all
the multitude of horrors, the holy ray of light that my dear, dear Lucy
was at last at peace, I do not think I could have borne it without
making a scene. It is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if I
had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not have
believed. As it was, I didn't know what to believe, and so got out of my
difficulty by attending to something else. I took the cover off my
typewriter, and said to Dr. Seward:--

"Let me write this all out now. We must be ready for Dr. Van Helsing
when he comes. I have sent a telegram to Jonathan to come on here when
he arrives in London from Whitby. In this matter dates are everything,
and I think that if we get all our material ready, and have every item
put in chronological order, we shall have done much. You tell me that
Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be able to tell him
when they come." He accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace, and I
began to typewrite from the beginning of the seventh cylinder. I used
manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as I had done with
all the rest. It was late when I got through, but Dr. Seward went about
his work of going his round of the patients; when he had finished he
came back and sat near me, reading, so that I did not feel too lonely
whilst I worked. How good and thoughtful he is; the world seems full of
good men--even if there _are_ monsters in it. Before I left him I
remembered what Jonathan put in his diary of the Professor's
perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at
Exeter; so, seeing that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed the
files of "The Westminster Gazette" and "The Pall Mall Gazette," and took
them to my room. I remember how much "The Dailygraph" and "The Whitby
Gazette," of which I had made cuttings, helped us to understand the
terrible events at Whitby when Count Dracula landed, so I shall look
through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I shall get some new
light. I am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He had got his
wife's wire just before starting. He is uncommonly clever, if one can
judge from his face, and full of energy. If this journal be true--and
judging by one's own wonderful experiences, it must be--he is also a man
of great nerve. That going down to the vault a second time was a
remarkable piece of daring. After reading his account of it I was
prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet,
business-like gentleman who came here to-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife went back to their own room,
and as I passed a while ago I heard the click of the typewriter. They
are hard at it. Mrs. Harker says that they are knitting together in
chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has got
the letters between the consignee of the boxes at Whitby and the
carriers in London who took charge of them. He is now reading his wife's
typescript of my diary. I wonder what they make out of it. Here it
is....

     Strange that it never struck me that the very next house might be
     the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had enough clues
     from the conduct of the patient Renfield! The bundle of letters
     relating to the purchase of the house were with the typescript. Oh,
     if we had only had them earlier we might have saved poor Lucy!
     Stop; that way madness lies! Harker has gone back, and is again
     collating his material. He says that by dinner-time they will be
     able to show a whole connected narrative. He thinks that in the
     meantime I should see Renfield, as hitherto he has been a sort of
     index to the coming and going of the Count. I hardly see this yet,
     but when I get at the dates I suppose I shall. What a good thing
     that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have
     found the dates otherwise....

     I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with his hands
     folded, smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed as sane as any
     one I ever saw. I sat down and talked with him on a lot of
     subjects, all of which he treated naturally. He then, of his own
     accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never mentioned to my
     knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quite
     confidently of getting his discharge at once. I believe that, had I
     not had the chat with Harker and read the letters and the dates of
     his outbursts, I should have been prepared to sign for him after a
     brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious. All
     those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the
     Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that
     his instinct is satisfied as to the vampire's ultimate triumph?
     Stay; he is himself zoöphagous, and in his wild ravings outside the
     chapel door of the deserted house he always spoke of "master." This
     all seems confirmation of our idea. However, after a while I came
     away; my friend is just a little too sane at present to make it
     safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think,
     and then--! So I came away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his; so
     I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and to
     have a strait-waistcoat ready in case of need.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's
courteous message that he would give me any information in his power I
thought it best to go down to Whitby and make, on the spot, such
inquiries as I wanted. It was now my object to trace that horrid cargo
of the Count's to its place in London. Later, we may be able to deal
with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the station, and
brought me to his father's house, where they had decided that I must
stay the night. They are hospitable, with true Yorkshire hospitality:
give a guest everything, and leave him free to do as he likes. They all
knew that I was busy, and that my stay was short, and Mr. Billington had
ready in his office all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes.
It gave me almost a turn to see again one of the letters which I had
seen on the Count's table before I knew of his diabolical plans.
Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and
with precision. He seemed to have been prepared for every obstacle which
might be placed by accident in the way of his intentions being carried
out. To use an Americanism, he had "taken no chances," and the absolute
accuracy with which his instructions were fulfilled, was simply the
logical result of his care. I saw the invoice, and took note of it:
"Fifty cases of common earth, to be used for experimental purposes."
Also the copy of letter to Carter Paterson, and their reply; of both of
these I got copies. This was all the information Mr. Billington could
give me, so I went down to the port and saw the coastguards, the Customs
officers and the harbour-master. They had all something to say of the
strange entry of the ship, which is already taking its place in local
tradition; but no one could add to the simple description "Fifty cases
of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in
communication with the men who had actually received the boxes. Their
tally was exact with the list, and they had nothing to add except that
the boxes were "main and mortal heavy," and that shifting them was dry
work. One of them added that it was hard lines that there wasn't any
gentleman "such-like as yourself, squire," to show some sort of
appreciation of their efforts in a liquid form; another put in a rider
that the thirst then generated was such that even the time which had
elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add, I took care
before leaving to lift, for ever and adequately, this source of
reproach.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me a line to
his old companion the station-master at King's Cross, so that when I
arrived there in the morning I was able to ask him about the arrival of
the boxes. He, too, put me at once in communication with the proper
officials, and I saw that their tally was correct with the original
invoice. The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here
limited; a noble use of them had, however, been made, and again I was
compelled to deal with the result in an _ex post facto_ manner.

From thence I went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met
with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their
day-book and letter-book, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross
office for more details. By good fortune, the men who did the teaming
were waiting for work, and the official at once sent them over, sending
also by one of them the way-bill and all the papers connected with the
delivery of the boxes at Carfax. Here again I found the tally agreeing
exactly; the carriers' men were able to supplement the paucity of the
written words with a few details. These were, I shortly found, connected
almost solely with the dusty nature of the job, and of the consequent
thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity,
through the medium of the currency of the realm, of the allaying, at a
later period, this beneficial evil, one of the men remarked:--

"That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it
ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in
the place that you might have slep' on it without 'urtin' of yer bones;
an' the place was that neglected that yer might 'ave smelled ole
Jerusalem in it. But the ole chapel--that took the cike, that did! Me
and my mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick enough. Lor', I
wouldn't take less nor a quid a moment to stay there arter dark."

Having been in the house, I could well believe him; but if he knew what
I know, he would, I think, have raised his terms.

Of one thing I am now satisfied: that _all_ the boxes which arrived at
Whitby from Varna in the _Demeter_ were safely deposited in the old
chapel at Carfax. There should be fifty of them there, unless any have
since been removed--as from Dr. Seward's diary I fear.

I shall try to see the carter who took away the boxes from Carfax when
Renfield attacked them. By following up this clue we may learn a good
deal.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Mina and I have worked all day, and we have put all the papers
into order.


_Mina Harker's Journal_

_30 September._--I am so glad that I hardly know how to contain myself.
It is, I suppose, the reaction from the haunting fear which I have had:
that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old wound might act
detrimentally on Jonathan. I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave a
face as I could, but I was sick with apprehension. The effort has,
however, done him good. He was never so resolute, never so strong, never
so full of volcanic energy, as at present. It is just as that dear, good
Professor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under
strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and
hope and determination; we have got everything in order for to-night. I
feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any
thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not
human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's
death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of pity in
one's heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we
expected. Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken Jonathan with
him, so I had to see them. It was to me a painful meeting, for it
brought back all poor dear Lucy's hopes of only a few months ago. Of
course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it seemed that Dr. Van
Helsing, too, has been quite "blowing my trumpet," as Mr. Morris
expressed it. Poor fellows, neither of them is aware that I know all
about the proposals they made to Lucy. They did not quite know what to
say or do, as they were ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they
had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought the matter over, and
came to the conclusion that the best thing I could do would be to post
them in affairs right up to date. I knew from Dr. Seward's diary that
they had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not fear
to betray any secret before the time. So I told them, as well as I
could, that I had read all the papers and diaries, and that my husband
and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order.
I gave them each a copy to read in the library. When Lord Godalming got
his and turned it over--it does make a pretty good pile--he said:--

"Did you write all this, Mrs. Harker?"

I nodded, and he went on:--

"I don't quite see the drift of it; but you people are all so good and
kind, and have been working so earnestly and so energetically, that all
I can do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to help you. I have
had one lesson already in accepting facts that should make a man humble
to the last hour of his life. Besides, I know you loved my poor Lucy--"
Here he turned away and covered his face with his hands. I could hear
the tears in his voice. Mr. Morris, with instinctive delicacy, just laid
a hand for a moment on his shoulder, and then walked quietly out of the
room. I suppose there is something in woman's nature that makes a man
free to break down before her and express his feelings on the tender or
emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood; for when
Lord Godalming found himself alone with me he sat down on the sofa and
gave way utterly and openly. I sat down beside him and took his hand. I
hope he didn't think it forward of me, and that if he ever thinks of it
afterwards he never will have such a thought. There I wrong him; I
_know_ he never will--he is too true a gentleman. I said to him, for I
could see that his heart was breaking:--

"I loved dear Lucy, and I know what she was to you, and what you were to
her. She and I were like sisters; and now she is gone, will you not let
me be like a sister to you in your trouble? I know what sorrows you have
had, though I cannot measure the depth of them. If sympathy and pity can
help in your affliction, won't you let me be of some little service--for
Lucy's sake?"

In an instant the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed
to me that all that he had of late been suffering in silence found a
vent at once. He grew quite hysterical, and raising his open hands, beat
his palms together in a perfect agony of grief. He stood up and then sat
down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an infinite
pity for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly. With a sob he laid his
head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with
emotion.

We women have something of the mother in us that makes us rise above
smaller matters when the mother-spirit is invoked; I felt this big
sorrowing man's head resting on me, as though it were that of the baby
that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he
were my own child. I never thought at the time how strange it all was.

After a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an
apology, though he made no disguise of his emotion. He told me that for
days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had been
unable to speak with any one, as a man must speak in his time of
sorrow. There was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with
whom, owing to the terrible circumstance with which his sorrow was
surrounded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said,
as he dried his eyes, "but I do not know even yet--and none other can
ever know--how much your sweet sympathy has been to me to-day. I shall
know better in time; and believe me that, though I am not ungrateful
now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me be
like a brother, will you not, for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?"

"For dear Lucy's sake," I said as we clasped hands. "Ay, and for your
own sake," he added, "for if a man's esteem and gratitude are ever worth
the winning, you have won mine to-day. If ever the future should bring
to you a time when you need a man's help, believe me, you will not call
in vain. God grant that no such time may ever come to you to break the
sunshine of your life; but if it should ever come, promise me that you
will let me know." He was so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that
I felt it would comfort him, so I said:--

"I promise."

As I came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a window.
He turned as he heard my footsteps. "How is Art?" he said. Then noticing
my red eyes, he went on: "Ah, I see you have been comforting him. Poor
old fellow! he needs it. No one but a woman can help a man when he is in
trouble of the heart; and he had no one to comfort him."

He bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart bled for him. I saw the
manuscript in his hand, and I knew that when he read it he would realise
how much I knew; so I said to him:--

"I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart. Will you let me
be your friend, and will you come to me for comfort if you need it? You
will know, later on, why I speak." He saw that I was in earnest, and
stooping, took my hand, and raising it to his lips, kissed it. It seemed
but poor comfort to so brave and unselfish a soul, and impulsively I
bent over and kissed him. The tears rose in his eyes, and there was a
momentary choking in his throat; he said quite calmly:--

"Little girl, you will never regret that true-hearted kindness, so long
as ever you live!" Then he went into the study to his friend.

"Little girl!"--the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he
proved himself a friend!




CHAPTER XVIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_30 September._--I got home at five o'clock, and found that Godalming
and Morris had not only arrived, but had already studied the transcript
of the various diaries and letters which Harker and his wonderful wife
had made and arranged. Harker had not yet returned from his visit to the
carriers' men, of whom Dr. Hennessey had written to me. Mrs. Harker gave
us a cup of tea, and I can honestly say that, for the first time since I
have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had
finished, Mrs. Harker said:--

"Dr. Seward, may I ask a favour? I want to see your patient, Mr.
Renfield. Do let me see him. What you have said of him in your diary
interests me so much!" She looked so appealing and so pretty that I
could not refuse her, and there was no possible reason why I should; so
I took her with me. When I went into the room, I told the man that a
lady would like to see him; to which he simply answered: "Why?"

"She is going through the house, and wants to see every one in it," I
answered. "Oh, very well," he said; "let her come in, by all means; but
just wait a minute till I tidy up the place." His method of tidying was
peculiar: he simply swallowed all the flies and spiders in the boxes
before I could stop him. It was quite evident that he feared, or was
jealous of, some interference. When he had got through his disgusting
task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down on the
edge of his bed with his head down, but with his eyelids raised so that
he could see her as she entered. For a moment I thought that he might
have some homicidal intent; I remembered how quiet he had been just
before he attacked me in my own study, and I took care to stand where I
could seize him at once if he attempted to make a spring at her. She
came into the room with an easy gracefulness which would at once command
the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the qualities mad
people most respect. She walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and
held out her hand.

"Good-evening, Mr. Renfield," said she. "You see, I know you, for Dr.
Seward has told me of you." He made no immediate reply, but eyed her all
over intently with a set frown on his face. This look gave way to one
of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he
said:--

"You're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? You can't be,
you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:--

"Oh no! I have a husband of my own, to whom I was married before I ever
saw Dr. Seward, or he me. I am Mrs. Harker."

"Then what are you doing here?"

"My husband and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward."

"Then don't stay."

"But why not?" I thought that this style of conversation might not be
pleasant to Mrs. Harker, any more than it was to me, so I joined in:--

"How did you know I wanted to marry any one?" His reply was simply
contemptuous, given in a pause in which he turned his eyes from Mrs.
Harker to me, instantly turning them back again:--

"What an asinine question!"

"I don't see that at all, Mr. Renfield," said Mrs. Harker, at once
championing me. He replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as
he had shown contempt to me:--

"You will, of course, understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man is so
loved and honoured as our host is, everything regarding him is of
interest in our little community. Dr. Seward is loved not only by his
household and his friends, but even by his patients, who, being some of
them hardly in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort causes and
effects. Since I myself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, I
cannot but notice that the sophistic tendencies of some of its inmates
lean towards the errors of _non causa_ and _ignoratio elenchi_." I
positively opened my eyes at this new development. Here was my own pet
lunatic--the most pronounced of his type that I had ever met
with--talking elemental philosophy, and with the manner of a polished
gentleman. I wonder if it was Mrs. Harker's presence which had touched
some chord in his memory. If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any
way due to her unconscious influence, she must have some rare gift or
power.

We continued to talk for some time; and, seeing that he was seemingly
quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me questioningly as she
began, to lead him to his favourite topic. I was again astonished, for
he addressed himself to the question with the impartiality of the
completest sanity; he even took himself as an example when he mentioned
certain things.

"Why, I myself am an instance of a man who had a strange belief. Indeed,
it was no wonder that my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my being
put under control. I used to fancy that life was a positive and
perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no
matter how low in the scale of creation, one might indefinitely prolong
life. At times I held the belief so strongly that I actually tried to
take human life. The doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion I
tried to kill him for the purpose of strengthening my vital powers by
the assimilation with my own body of his life through the medium of his
blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is
the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum has
vulgarised the truism to the very point of contempt. Isn't that true,
doctor?" I nodded assent, for I was so amazed that I hardly knew what to
either think or say; it was hard to imagine that I had seen him eat up
his spiders and flies not five minutes before. Looking at my watch, I
saw that I should go to the station to meet Van Helsing, so I told Mrs.
Harker that it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying
pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope I may see you often,
under auspices pleasanter to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, he
replied:--

"Good-bye, my dear. I pray God I may never see your sweet face again.
May He bless and keep you!"

When I went to the station to meet Van Helsing I left the boys behind
me. Poor Art seemed more cheerful than he has been since Lucy first took
ill, and Quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been for
many a long day.

Van Helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a
boy. He saw me at once, and rushed up to me, saying:--

"Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been busy, for I come
here to stay if need be. All affairs are settled with me, and I have
much to tell. Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And
Arthur and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!"

As I drove to the house I told him of what had passed, and of how my own
diary had come to be of some use through Mrs. Harker's suggestion; at
which the Professor interrupted me:--

"Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina! She has man's brain--a brain that a man
should have were he much gifted--and a woman's heart. The good God
fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when He made that so good
combination. Friend John, up to now fortune has made that woman of help
to us; after to-night she must not have to do with this so terrible
affair. It is not good that she run a risk so great. We men are
determined--nay, are we not pledged?--to destroy this monster; but it is
no part for a woman. Even if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her
in so much and so many horrors; and hereafter she may suffer--both in
waking, from her nerves, and in sleep, from her dreams. And, besides,
she is young woman and not so long married; there may be other things to
think of some time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, then she
must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-bye to this work, and
we go alone." I agreed heartily with him, and then I told him what we
had found in his absence: that the house which Dracula had bought was
the very next one to my own. He was amazed, and a great concern seemed
to come on him. "Oh that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we
might have reached him in time to save poor Lucy. However, 'the milk
that is spilt cries not out afterwards,' as you say. We shall not think
of that, but go on our way to the end." Then he fell into a silence that
lasted till we entered my own gateway. Before we went to prepare for
dinner he said to Mrs. Harker:--

"I am told, Madam Mina, by my friend John that you and your husband have
put up in exact order all things that have been, up to this moment."

"Not up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to
this morning."

"But why not up to now? We have seen hitherto how good light all the
little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who
has told is the worse for it."

Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her pockets, she
said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me if it must go in. It
is my record of to-day. I too have seen the need of putting down at
present everything, however trivial; but there is little in this except
what is personal. Must it go in?" The Professor read it over gravely,
and handed it back, saying:--

"It need not go in if you do not wish it; but I pray that it may. It can
but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more
honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with
another blush and a bright smile.

And so now, up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete
and in order. The Professor took away one copy to study after dinner,
and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o'clock. The rest of us
have already read everything; so when we meet in the study we shall all
be informed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with this
terrible and mysterious enemy.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after
dinner, which had been at six o'clock, we unconsciously formed a sort of
board or committee. Professor Van Helsing took the head of the table, to
which Dr. Seward motioned him as he came into the room. He made me sit
next to him on his right, and asked me to act as secretary; Jonathan sat
next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr.
Morris--Lord Godalming being next the Professor, and Dr. Seward in the
centre. The Professor said:--

"I may, I suppose, take it that we are all acquainted with the facts
that are in these papers." We all expressed assent, and he went on:--

"Then it were, I think good that I tell you something of the kind of
enemy with which we have to deal. I shall then make known to you
something of the history of this man, which has been ascertained for me.
So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure
according.

"There are such beings as vampires; some of us have evidence that they
exist. Even had we not the proof of our own unhappy experience, the
teachings and the records of the past give proof enough for sane
peoples. I admit that at the first I was sceptic. Were it not that
through long years I have train myself to keep an open mind, I could not
have believe until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. 'See! see!
I prove; I prove.' Alas! Had I known at the first what now I know--nay,
had I even guess at him--one so precious life had been spared to many of
us who did love her. But that is gone; and we must so work, that other
poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_ do not die
like the bee when he sting once. He is only stronger; and being
stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is
amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of
cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages; he have
still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the
divination by the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to are
for him at command; he is brute, and more than brute; he is devil in
callous, and the heart of him is not; he can, within limitations, appear
at will when, and where, and in any of the forms that are to him; he
can, within his range, direct the elements; the storm, the fog, the
thunder; he can command all the meaner things: the rat, and the owl, and
the bat--the moth, and the fox, and the wolf; he can grow and become
small; and he can at times vanish and come unknown. How then are we to
begin our strike to destroy him? How shall we find his where; and having
found it, how can we destroy? My friends, this is much; it is a terrible
task that we undertake, and there may be consequence to make the brave
shudder. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win; and then
where end we? Life is nothings; I heed him not. But to fail here, is not
mere life or death. It is that we become as him; that we henceforward
become foul things of the night like him--without heart or conscience,
preying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best. To us for
ever are the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again?
We go on for all time abhorred by all; a blot on the face of God's
sunshine; an arrow in the side of Him who died for man. But we are face
to face with duty; and in such case must we shrink? For me, I say, no;
but then I am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his
song of birds, his music and his love, lie far behind. You others are
young. Some have seen sorrow; but there are fair days yet in store. What
say you?"

Whilst he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my hand. I feared, oh so
much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I
saw his hand stretch out; but it was life to me to feel its touch--so
strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man's hand can speak for
itself; it does not even need a woman's love to hear its music.

When the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, and I
in his; there was no need for speaking between us.

"I answer for Mina and myself," he said.

"Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual.

"I am with you," said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other
reason."

Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up and, after laying his
golden crucifix on the table, held out his hand on either side. I took
his right hand, and Lord Godalming his left; Jonathan held my right with
his left and stretched across to Mr. Morris. So as we all took hands our
solemn compact was made. I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not even
occur to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing
went on with a sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work
had begun. It was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way,
as any other transaction of life:--

"Well, you know what we have to contend against; but we, too, are not
without strength. We have on our side power of combination--a power
denied to the vampire kind; we have sources of science; we are free to
act and think; and the hours of the day and the night are ours equally.
In fact, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are
free to use them. We have self-devotion in a cause, and an end to
achieve which is not a selfish one. These things are much.

"Now let us see how far the general powers arrayed against us are
restrict, and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the
limitations of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular.

"All we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. These do not
at the first appear much, when the matter is one of life and death--nay
of more than either life or death. Yet must we be satisfied; in the
first place because we have to be--no other means is at our control--and
secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and
superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest for
others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would
have received such a possibility, in the midst of our scientific,
sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? We even scouted a belief
that we saw justified under our very eyes. Take it, then, that the
vampire, and the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the
moment on the same base. For, let me tell you, he is known everywhere
that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany
all over, in France, in India, even in the Chernosese; and in China, so
far from us in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at
this day. He have follow the wake of the berserker Icelander, the
devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then, we
have all we may act upon; and let me tell you that very much of the
beliefs are justified by what we have seen in our own so unhappy
experience. The vampire live on, and cannot die by mere passing of the
time; he can flourish when that he can fatten on the blood of the
living. Even more, we have seen amongst us that he can even grow
younger; that his vital faculties grow strenuous, and seem as though
they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he
cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend
Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never!
He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror no reflect, as again
Jonathan observe. He has the strength of many of his hand--witness again
Jonathan when he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he help him
from the diligence too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gather
from the ship arrival in Whitby, when he tear open the dog; he can be as
bat, as Madam Mina saw him on the window at Whitby, and as friend John
saw him fly from this so near house, and as my friend Quincey saw him at
the window of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he create--that noble
ship's captain proved him of this; but, from what we know, the distance
he can make this mist is limited, and it can only be round himself. He
come on moonlight rays as elemental dust--as again Jonathan saw those
sisters in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw
Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the
tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from anything or
into anything, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up with
fire--solder you call it. He can see in the dark--no small power this,
in a world which is one half shut from the light. Ah, but hear me
through. He can do all these things, yet he is not free. Nay; he is even
more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in his cell.
He cannot go where he lists; he who is not of nature has yet to obey
some of nature's laws--why we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the
first, unless there be some one of the household who bid him to come;
though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does
that of all evil things, at the coming of the day. Only at certain times
can he have limited freedom. If he be not at the place whither he is
bound, he can only change himself at noon or at exact sunrise or sunset.
These things are we told, and in this record of ours we have proof by
inference. Thus, whereas he can do as he will within his limit, when he
have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the place
unhallowed, as we saw when he went to the grave of the suicide at
Whitby; still at other time he can only change when the time come. It is
said, too, that he can only pass running water at the slack or the flood
of the tide. Then there are things which so afflict him that he has no
power, as the garlic that we know of; and as for things sacred, as this
symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to
them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and
silent with respect. There are others, too, which I shall tell you of,
lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on his
coffin keep him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the
coffin kill him so that he be true dead; and as for the stake through
him, we know already of its peace; or the cut-off head that giveth rest.
We have seen it with our eyes.

"Thus when we find the habitation of this man-that-was, we can confine
him to his coffin and destroy him, if we obey what we know. But he is
clever. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to
make his record; and, from all the means that are, he tell me of what he
has been. He must, indeed, have been that Voivode Dracula who won his
name against the Turk, over the great river on the very frontier of
Turkey-land. If it be so, then was he no common man; for in that time,
and for centuries after, he was spoken of as the cleverest and the most
cunning, as well as the bravest of the sons of the 'land beyond the
forest.' That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to his
grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says
Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions who
were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One. They
learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake
Hermanstadt, where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his due. In the
records are such words as 'stregoica'--witch, 'ordog,' and
'pokol'--Satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very Dracula is
spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all understand too well. There have been
from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their
graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it
is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in
all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest."

Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window,
and he now got up quietly, and went out of the room. There was a little
pause, and then the Professor went on:--

"And now we must settle what we do. We have here much data, and we must
proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from the inquiry of Jonathan
that from the castle to Whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all of which
were delivered at Carfax; we also know that at least some of these boxes
have been removed. It seems to me, that our first step should be to
ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond that wall
where we look to-day; or whether any more have been removed. If the
latter, we must trace----"

Here we were interrupted in a very startling way. Outside the house came
the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window was shattered with a
bullet, which, ricochetting from the top of the embrasure, struck the
far wall of the room. I am afraid I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked
out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalming flew over to the
window and threw up the sash. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris's voice
without:--

"Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in and tell you about
it." A minute later he came in and said:--

"It was an idiotic thing of me to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs.
Harker, most sincerely; I fear I must have frightened you terribly. But
the fact is that whilst the Professor was talking there came a big bat
and sat on the window-sill. I have got such a horror of the damned
brutes from recent events that I cannot stand them, and I went out to
have a shot, as I have been doing of late of evenings, whenever I have
seen one. You used to laugh at me for it then, Art."

"Did you hit it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing.

"I don't know; I fancy not, for it flew away into the wood." Without
saying any more he took his seat, and the Professor began to resume his
statement:--

"We must trace each of these boxes; and when we are ready, we must
either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to
speak, sterilise the earth, so that no more he can seek safety in it.
Thus in the end we may find him in his form of man between the hours of
noon and sunset, and so engage with him when he is at his most weak.

"And now for you, Madam Mina, this night is the end until all be well.
You are too precious to us to have such risk. When we part to-night, you
no more must question. We shall tell you all in good time. We are men
and are able to bear; but you must be our star and our hope, and we
shall act all the more free that you are not in the danger, such as we
are."

All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved; but it did not seem to me
good that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their
safety--strength being the best safety--through care of me; but their
minds were made up, and, though it was a bitter pill for me to swallow,
I could say nothing, save to accept their chivalrous care of me.

Mr. Morris resumed the discussion:--

"As there is no time to lose, I vote we have a look at his house right
now. Time is everything with him; and swift action on our part may save
another victim."

I own that my heart began to fail me when the time for action came so
close, but I did not say anything, for I had a greater fear that if I
appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave
me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax,
with means to get into the house.

Manlike, they had told me to go to bed and sleep; as if a woman can
sleep when those she loves are in danger! I shall lie down and pretend
to sleep, lest Jonathan have added anxiety about me when he returns.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_1 October, 4 a. m._--Just as we were about to leave the house, an
urgent message was brought to me from Renfield to know if I would see
him at once, as he had something of the utmost importance to say to me.
I told the messenger to say that I would attend to his wishes in the
morning; I was busy just at the moment. The attendant added:--

"He seems very importunate, sir. I have never seen him so eager. I don't
know but what, if you don't see him soon, he will have one of his
violent fits." I knew the man would not have said this without some
cause, so I said: "All right; I'll go now"; and I asked the others to
wait a few minutes for me, as I had to go and see my "patient."

"Take me with you, friend John," said the Professor. "His case in your
diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on _our_
case. I should much like to see him, and especial when his mind is
disturbed."

"May I come also?" asked Lord Godalming.

"Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and
we all went down the passage together.

We found him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more
rational in his speech and manner than I had ever seen him. There was an
unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had ever
met with in a lunatic; and he took it for granted that his reasons would
prevail with others entirely sane. We all four went into the room, but
none of the others at first said anything. His request was that I would
at once release him from the asylum and send him home. This he backed up
with arguments regarding his complete recovery, and adduced his own
existing sanity. "I appeal to your friends," he said, "they will,
perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. By the way, you have
not introduced me." I was so much astonished, that the oddness of
introducing a madman in an asylum did not strike me at the moment; and,
besides, there was a certain dignity in the man's manner, so much of
the habit of equality, that I at once made the introduction: "Lord
Godalming; Professor Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr.
Renfield." He shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:--

"Lord Godalming, I had the honour of seconding your father at the
Windham; I grieve to know, by your holding the title, that he is no
more. He was a man loved and honoured by all who knew him; and in his
youth was, I have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much
patronised on Derby night. Mr. Morris, you should be proud of your great
state. Its reception into the Union was a precedent which may have
far-reaching effects hereafter, when the Pole and the Tropics may hold
alliance to the Stars and Stripes. The power of Treaty may yet prove a
vast engine of enlargement, when the Monroe doctrine takes its true
place as a political fable. What shall any man say of his pleasure at
meeting Van Helsing? Sir, I make no apology for dropping all forms of
conventional prefix. When an individual has revolutionised therapeutics
by his discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter,
conventional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to limit him to
one of a class. You, gentlemen, who by nationality, by heredity, or by
the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective
places in the moving world, I take to witness that I am as sane as at
least the majority of men who are in full possession of their liberties.
And I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as
well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me as one to
be considered as under exceptional circumstances." He made this last
appeal with a courtly air of conviction which was not without its own
charm.

I think we were all staggered. For my own part, I was under the
conviction, despite my knowledge of the man's character and history,
that his reason had been restored; and I felt under a strong impulse to
tell him that I was satisfied as to his sanity, and would see about the
necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I thought it
better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old
I knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable.
So I contented myself with making a general statement that he appeared
to be improving very rapidly; that I would have a longer chat with him
in the morning, and would then see what I could do in the direction of
meeting his wishes. This did not at all satisfy him, for he said
quickly:--

"But I fear, Dr. Seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish. I desire to
go at once--here--now--this very hour--this very moment, if I may. Time
presses, and in our implied agreement with the old scytheman it is of
the essence of the contract. I am sure it is only necessary to put
before so admirable a practitioner as Dr. Seward so simple, yet so
momentous a wish, to ensure its fulfilment." He looked at me keenly, and
seeing the negative in my face, turned to the others, and scrutinised
them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:--

"Is it possible that I have erred in my supposition?"

"You have," I said frankly, but at the same time, as I felt, brutally.
There was a considerable pause, and then he said slowly:--

"Then I suppose I must only shift my ground of request. Let me ask for
this concession--boon, privilege, what you will. I am content to implore
in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for the sake of others. I
am not at liberty to give you the whole of my reasons; but you may, I
assure you, take it from me that they are good ones, sound and
unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look,
sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which
animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of
your friends." Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a growing
conviction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual method was
but yet another form or phase of his madness, and so determined to let
him go on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like
all lunatics, give himself away in the end. Van Helsing was gazing at
him with a look of utmost intensity, his bushy eyebrows almost meeting
with the fixed concentration of his look. He said to Renfield in a tone
which did not surprise me at the time, but only when I thought of it
afterwards--for it was as of one addressing an equal:--

"Can you not tell frankly your real reason for wishing to be free
to-night? I will undertake that if you will satisfy even me--a stranger,
without prejudice, and with the habit of keeping an open mind--Dr.
Seward will give you, at his own risk and on his own responsibility, the
privilege you seek." He shook his head sadly, and with a look of
poignant regret on his face. The Professor went on:--

"Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the
highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete
reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity we have reason to doubt, since
you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If
you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can
we perform the duty which you yourself put upon us? Be wise, and help
us; and if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish." He still shook
his head as he said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, I have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and
if I were free to speak I should not hesitate a moment; but I am not my
own master in the matter. I can only ask you to trust me. If I am
refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it was now
time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so I went
towards the door, simply saying:--

"Come, my friends, we have work to do. Good-night."

As, however, I got near the door, a new change came over the patient. He
moved towards me so quickly that for the moment I feared that he was
about to make another homicidal attack. My fears, however, were
groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly, and made his
petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the very excess of his
emotion was militating against him, by restoring us more to our old
relations, he became still more demonstrative. I glanced at Van Helsing,
and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more
fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his
efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the same
constantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some request of
which at the time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when he
wanted a cat; and I was prepared to see the collapse into the same
sullen acquiescence on this occasion. My expectation was not realised,
for, when he found that his appeal would not be successful, he got into
quite a frantic condition. He threw himself on his knees, and held up
his hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured forth a
torrent of entreaty, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his
whole face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:--

"Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me out
of this house at once. Send me away how you will and where you will;
send keepers with me with whips and chains; let them take me in a
strait-waistcoat, manacled and leg-ironed, even to a gaol; but let me go
out of this. You don't know what you do by keeping me here. I am
speaking from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. You don't know
whom you wrong, or how; and I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell.
By all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is
lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of the Almighty, take me out
of this and save my soul from guilt! Can't you hear me, man? Can't you
understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that I am sane and
earnest now; that I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting
for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go! let me go!"

I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so
would bring on a fit; so I took him by the hand and raised him up.

"Come," I said sternly, "no more of this; we have had quite enough
already. Get to your bed and try to behave more discreetly."

He suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for several moments. Then,
without a word, he rose and moving over, sat down on the side of the
bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had
expected.

When I was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me in a
quiet, well-bred voice:--

"You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later
on, that I did what I could to convince you to-night."




CHAPTER XIX

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 October, 5 a. m._--I went with the party to the search with an easy
mind, for I think I never saw Mina so absolutely strong and well. I am
so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do the work.
Somehow, it was a dread to me that she was in this fearful business at
all; but now that her work is done, and that it is due to her energy and
brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in such a way
that every point tells, she may well feel that her part is finished, and
that she can henceforth leave the rest to us. We were, I think, all a
little upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came away from his
room we were silent till we got back to the study. Then Mr. Morris said
to Dr. Seward:--

"Say, Jack, if that man wasn't attempting a bluff, he is about the
sanest lunatic I ever saw. I'm not sure, but I believe that he had some
serious purpose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a
chance." Lord Godalming and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing added:--

"Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it,
for I fear that if it had been to me to decide I would before that last
hysterical outburst have given him free. But we live and learn, and in
our present task we must take no chance, as my friend Quincey would say.
All is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a
dreamy kind of way:--

"I don't know but that I agree with you. If that man had been an
ordinary lunatic I would have taken my chance of trusting him; but he
seems so mixed up with the Count in an indexy kind of way that I am
afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can't forget how
he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear my
throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and
master,' and he may want to get out to help him in some diabolical way.
That horrid thing has the wolves and the rats and his own kind to help
him, so I suppose he isn't above trying to use a respectable lunatic. He
certainly did seem earnest, though. I only hope we have done what is
best. These things, in conjunction with the wild work we have in hand,
help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand
on his shoulder, said in his grave, kindly way:--

"Friend John, have no fear. We are trying to do our duty in a very sad
and terrible case; we can only do as we deem best. What else have we to
hope for, except the pity of the good God?" Lord Godalming had slipped
away for a few minutes, but now he returned. He held up a little silver
whistle, as he remarked:--

"That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on
call." Having passed the wall, we took our way to the house, taking care
to keep in the shadows of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone
out. When we got to the porch the Professor opened his bag and took out
a lot of things, which he laid on the step, sorting them into four
little groups, evidently one for each. Then he spoke:--

"My friends, we are going into a terrible danger, and we need arms of
many kinds. Our enemy is not merely spiritual. Remember that he has the
strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are
of the common kind--and therefore breakable or crushable--his are not
amenable to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong
in all than him, can at certain times hold him; but they cannot hurt him
as we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from his
touch. Keep this near your heart"--as he spoke he lifted a little silver
crucifix and held it out to me, I being nearest to him--"put these
flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a wreath of withered
garlic blossoms--"for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this
knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which you can
fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last, this,
which we must not desecrate needless." This was a portion of Sacred
Wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others
was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the
skeleton keys? If so that we can open the door, we need not break house
by the window, as before at Miss Lucy's."

Dr. Seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a
surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after
a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a rusty
clang, shot back. We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and
it slowly opened. It was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in
Dr. Seward's diary of the opening of Miss Westenra's tomb; I fancy that
the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with one accord they
shrank back. The Professor was the first to move forward, and stepped
into the open door.

"_In manus tuas, Domine!_" he said, crossing himself as he passed over
the threshold. We closed the door behind us, lest when we should have
lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. The
Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be able to open it
from within should we be in a hurry making our exit. Then we all lit our
lamps and proceeded on our search.

The light from the tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd forms, as the
rays crossed each other, or the opacity of our bodies threw great
shadows. I could not for my life get away from the feeling that there
was some one else amongst us. I suppose it was the recollection, so
powerfully brought home to me by the grim surroundings, of that terrible
experience in Transylvania. I think the feeling was common to us all,
for I noticed that the others kept looking over their shoulders at every
sound and every new shadow, just as I felt myself doing.

The whole place was thick with dust. The floor was seemingly inches
deep, except where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down
my lamp I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The
walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and in the corners were masses of
spider's webs, whereon the dust had gathered till they looked like old
tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the
hall was a great bunch of keys, with a time-yellowed label on each. They
had been used several times, for on the table were several similar rents
in the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor
lifted them. He turned to me and said:--

"You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and you know
it at least more than we do. Which is the way to the chapel?" I had an
idea of its direction, though on my former visit I had not been able to
get admission to it; so I led the way, and after a few wrong turnings
found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands.
"This is the spot," said the Professor as he turned his lamp on a small
map of the house, copied from the file of my original correspondence
regarding the purchase. With a little trouble we found the key on the
bunch and opened the door. We were prepared for some unpleasantness, for
as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous air seemed to exhale
through the gaps, but none of us ever expected such an odour as we
encountered. None of the others had met the Count at all at close
quarters, and when I had seen him he was either in the fasting stage of
his existence in his rooms or, when he was gloated with fresh blood, in
a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was small and
close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul. There was
an earthy smell, as of some dry miasma, which came through the fouler
air. But as to the odour itself, how shall I describe it? It was not
alone that it was composed of all the ills of mortality and with the
pungent, acrid smell of blood, but it seemed as though corruption had
become itself corrupt. Faugh! it sickens me to think of it. Every breath
exhaled by that monster seemed to have clung to the place and
intensified its loathsomeness.

Under ordinary circumstances such a stench would have brought our
enterprise to an end; but this was no ordinary case, and the high and
terrible purpose in which we were involved gave us a strength which rose
above merely physical considerations. After the involuntary shrinking
consequent on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our
work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses.

We made an accurate examination of the place, the Professor saying as we
began:--

"The first thing is to see how many of the boxes are left; we must then
examine every hole and corner and cranny and see if we cannot get some
clue as to what has become of the rest." A glance was sufficient to show
how many remained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was
no mistaking them.

There were only twenty-nine left out of the fifty! Once I got a fright,
for, seeing Lord Godalming suddenly turn and look out of the vaulted
door into the dark passage beyond, I looked too, and for an instant my
heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to
see the high lights of the Count's evil face, the ridge of the nose, the
red eyes, the red lips, the awful pallor. It was only for a moment, for,
as Lord Godalming said, "I thought I saw a face, but it was only the
shadows," and resumed his inquiry, I turned my lamp in the direction,
and stepped into the passage. There was no sign of any one; and as there
were no corners, no doors, no aperture of any kind, but only the solid
walls of the passage, there could be no hiding-place even for _him_. I
took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing.

A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which
he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for
undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we saw a whole mass
of phosphorescence, which twinkled like stars. We all instinctively drew
back. The whole place was becoming alive with rats.

For a moment or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalming, who was
seemingly prepared for such an emergency. Rushing over to the great
iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward had described from the outside,
and which I had seen myself, he turned the key in the lock, drew the
huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver
whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered
from behind Dr. Seward's house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a
minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of the house.
Unconsciously we had all moved towards the door, and as we moved I
noticed that the dust had been much disturbed: the boxes which had been
taken out had been brought this way. But even in the minute that had
elapsed the number of the rats had vastly increased. They seemed to
swarm over the place all at once, till the lamplight, shining on their
moving dark bodies and glittering, baleful eyes, made the place look
like a bank of earth set with fireflies. The dogs dashed on, but at the
threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting
their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were
multiplying in thousands, and we moved out.

Lord Godalming lifted one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him
on the floor. The instant his feet touched the ground he seemed to
recover his courage, and rushed at his natural enemies. They fled before
him so fast that before he had shaken the life out of a score, the other
dogs, who had by now been lifted in the same manner, had but small prey
ere the whole mass had vanished.

With their going it seemed as if some evil presence had departed, for
the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at
their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over and tossed them in
the air with vicious shakes. We all seemed to find our spirits rise.
Whether it was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening of
the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding ourselves
in the open I know not; but most certainly the shadow of dread seemed to
slip from us like a robe, and the occasion of our coming lost something
of its grim significance, though we did not slacken a whit in our
resolution. We closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and
bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. We found
nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all
untouched save for my own footsteps when I had made my first visit.
Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when
we returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been
rabbit-hunting in a summer wood.

The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front.
Dr. Van Helsing had taken the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and
locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket
when he had done.

"So far," he said, "our night has been eminently successful. No harm has
come to us such as I feared might be and yet we have ascertained how
many boxes are missing. More than all do I rejoice that this, our
first--and perhaps our most difficult and dangerous--step has been
accomplished without the bringing thereinto our most sweet Madam Mina or
troubling her waking or sleeping thoughts with sights and sounds and
smells of horror which she might never forget. One lesson, too, we have
learned, if it be allowable to argue _a particulari_: that the brute
beasts which are to the Count's command are yet themselves not amenable
to his spiritual power; for look, these rats that would come to his
call, just as from his castle top he summon the wolves to your going and
to that poor mother's cry, though they come to him, they run pell-mell
from the so little dogs of my friend Arthur. We have other matters
before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used
his power over the brute world for the only or the last time to-night.
So be it that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity
to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for the
stake of human souls. And now let us go home. The dawn is close at hand,
and we have reason to be content with our first night's work. It may be
ordained that we have many nights and days to follow, if full of peril;
but we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink."

The house was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who
was screaming away in one of the distant wards, and a low, moaning sound
from Renfield's room. The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself,
after the manner of the insane, with needless thoughts of pain.

I came tiptoe into our own room, and found Mina asleep, breathing so
softly that I had to put my ear down to hear it. She looks paler than
usual. I hope the meeting to-night has not upset her. I am truly
thankful that she is to be left out of our future work, and even of our
deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not
think so at first, but I know better now. Therefore I am glad that it is
settled. There may be things which would frighten her to hear; and yet
to conceal them from her might be worse than to tell her if once she
suspected that there was any concealment. Henceforth our work is to be a
sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can tell her that all
is finished, and the earth free from a monster of the nether world. I
daresay it will be difficult to begin to keep silence after such
confidence as ours; but I must be resolute, and to-morrow I shall keep
dark over to-night's doings, and shall refuse to speak of anything that
has happened. I rest on the sofa, so as not to disturb her.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 October, later._--I suppose it was natural that we should have all
overslept ourselves, for the day was a busy one, and the night had no
rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept
till the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to call two or
three times before she awoke. Indeed, she was so sound asleep that for a
few seconds she did not recognize me, but looked at me with a sort of
blank terror, as one looks who has been waked out of a bad dream. She
complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the
day. We now know of twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it be
that several were taken in any of these removals we may be able to trace
them all. Such will, of course, immensely simplify our labour, and the
sooner the matter is attended to the better. I shall look up Thomas
Snelling to-day.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_1 October._--It was towards noon when I was awakened by the Professor
walking into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and it
is quite evident that last night's work has helped to take some of the
brooding weight off his mind. After going over the adventure of the
night he suddenly said:--

"Your patient interests me much. May it be that with you I visit him
this morning? Or if that you are too occupy, I can go alone if it may
be. It is a new experience to me to find a lunatic who talk philosophy,
and reason so sound." I had some work to do which pressed, so I told him
that if he would go alone I would be glad, as then I should not have to
keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him the necessary
instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against
getting any false impression from my patient. "But," he answered, "I
want him to talk of himself and of his delusion as to consuming live
things. He said to Madam Mina, as I see in your diary of yesterday, that
he had once had such a belief. Why do you smile, friend John?"

"Excuse me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid my hand on the
type-written matter. "When our sane and learned lunatic made that very
statement of how he _used_ to consume life, his mouth was actually
nauseous with the flies and spiders which he had eaten just before Mrs.
Harker entered the room." Van Helsing smiled in turn. "Good!" he said.
"Your memory is true, friend John. I should have remembered. And yet it
is this very obliquity of thought and memory which makes mental disease
such a fascinating study. Perhaps I may gain more knowledge out of the
folly of this madman than I shall from the teaching of the most wise.
Who knows?" I went on with my work, and before long was through that in
hand. It seemed that the time had been very short indeed, but there was
Van Helsing back in the study. "Do I interrupt?" he asked politely as he
stood at the door.

"Not at all," I answered. "Come in. My work is finished, and I am free.
I can go with you now, if you like.

"It is needless; I have seen him!"

"Well?"

"I fear that he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short.
When I entered his room he was sitting on a stool in the centre, with
his elbows on his knees, and his face was the picture of sullen
discontent. I spoke to him as cheerfully as I could, and with such a
measure of respect as I could assume. He made no reply whatever. "Don't
you know me?" I asked. His answer was not reassuring: "I know you well
enough; you are the old fool Van Helsing. I wish you would take yourself
and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed
Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable
sullenness as indifferent to me as though I had not been in the room at
all. Thus departed for this time my chance of much learning from this so
clever lunatic; so I shall go, if I may, and cheer myself with a few
happy words with that sweet soul Madam Mina. Friend John, it does
rejoice me unspeakable that she is no more to be pained, no more to be
worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it
is better so."

"I agree with you with all my heart," I answered earnestly, for I did
not want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it.
Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and who have
been in many tight places in our time; but it is no place for a woman,
and if she had remained in touch with the affair, it would in time
infallibly have wrecked her."

So Van Helsing has gone to confer with Mrs. Harker and Harker; Quincey
and Art are all out following up the clues as to the earth-boxes. I
shall finish my round of work and we shall meet to-night.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_1 October._--It is strange to me to be kept in the dark as I am to-day;
after Jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him
manifestly avoid certain matters, and those the most vital of all. This
morning I slept late after the fatigues of yesterday, and though
Jonathan was late too, he was the earlier. He spoke to me before he went
out, never more sweetly or tenderly, but he never mentioned a word of
what had happened in the visit to the Count's house. And yet he must
have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it
must have distressed him even more than it did me. They all agreed that
it was best that I should not be drawn further into this awful work, and
I acquiesced. But to think that he keeps anything from me! And now I am
crying like a silly fool, when I _know_ it comes from my husband's great
love and from the good, good wishes of those other strong men.

That has done me good. Well, some day Jonathan will tell me all; and
lest it should ever be that he should think for a moment that I kept
anything from him, I still keep my journal as usual. Then if he has
feared of my trust I shall show it to him, with every thought of my
heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and
low-spirited to-day. I suppose it is the reaction from the terrible
excitement.

Last night I went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told
me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I
kept thinking over everything that has been ever since Jonathan came to
see me in London, and it all seems like a horrible tragedy, with fate
pressing on relentlessly to some destined end. Everything that one does
seems, no matter how right it may be, to bring on the very thing which
is most to be deplored. If I hadn't gone to Whitby, perhaps poor dear
Lucy would be with us now. She hadn't taken to visiting the churchyard
till I came, and if she hadn't come there in the day-time with me she
wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't gone there at
night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he did.
Oh, why did I ever go to Whitby? There now, crying again! I wonder what
has come over me to-day. I must hide it from Jonathan, for if he knew
that I had been crying twice in one morning--I, who never cried on my
own account, and whom he has never caused to shed a tear--the dear
fellow would fret his heart out. I shall put a bold face on, and if I do
feel weepy, he shall never see it. I suppose it is one of the lessons
that we poor women have to learn....

I can't quite remember how I fell asleep last night. I remember hearing
the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of queer sounds, like praying
on a very tumultuous scale, from Mr. Renfield's room, which is somewhere
under this. And then there was silence over everything, silence so
profound that it startled me, and I got up and looked out of the window.
All was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by the moonlight
seeming full of a silent mystery of their own. Not a thing seemed to be
stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin
streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness
across the grass towards the house, seemed to have a sentience and a
vitality of its own. I think that the digression of my thoughts must
have done me good, for when I got back to bed I found a lethargy
creeping over me. I lay a while, but could not quite sleep, so I got out
and looked out of the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now
close up to the house, so that I could see it lying thick against the
wall, as though it were stealing up to the windows. The poor man was
more loud than ever, and though I could not distinguish a word he said,
I could in some way recognise in his tones some passionate entreaty on
his part. Then there was the sound of a struggle, and I knew that the
attendants were dealing with him. I was so frightened that I crept into
bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears.
I was not then a bit sleepy, at least so I thought; but I must have
fallen asleep, for, except dreams, I do not remember anything until the
morning, when Jonathan woke me. I think that it took me an effort and a
little time to realise where I was, and that it was Jonathan who was
bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of
the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams.

I thought that I was asleep, and waiting for Jonathan to come back. I
was very anxious about him, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and my
hands, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the
usual pace. And so I slept uneasily and thought. Then it began to dawn
upon me that the air was heavy, and dank, and cold. I put back the
clothes from my face, and found, to my surprise, that all was dim
around. The gaslight which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down,
came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evidently
grown thicker and poured into the room. Then it occurred to me that I
had shut the window before I had come to bed. I would have got out to
make certain on the point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my
limbs and even my will. I lay still and endured; that was all. I closed
my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what
tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The
mist grew thicker and thicker and I could see now how it came in, for I
could see it like smoke--or with the white energy of boiling
water--pouring in, not through the window, but through the joinings of
the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it became
concentrated into a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, through the top
of which I could see the light of the gas shining like a red eye. Things
began to whirl through my brain just as the cloudy column was now
whirling in the room, and through it all came the scriptural words "a
pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night." Was it indeed some such
spiritual guidance that was coming to me in my sleep? But the pillar was
composed of both the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the
red eye, which at the thought got a new fascination for me; till, as I
looked, the fire divided, and seemed to shine on me through the fog like
two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of in her momentary mental wandering
when, on the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of St. Mary's
Church. Suddenly the horror burst upon me that it was thus that Jonathan
had seen those awful women growing into reality through the whirling mist
in the moonlight, and in my dream I must have fainted, for all became
black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to
show me a livid white face bending over me out of the mist. I must be
careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were
too much of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to prescribe
something for me which would make me sleep, only that I fear to alarm
them. Such a dream at the present time would become woven into their
fears for me. To-night I shall strive hard to sleep naturally. If I do
not, I shall to-morrow night get them to give me a dose of chloral; that
cannot hurt me for once, and it will give me a good night's sleep. Last
night tired me more than if I had not slept at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 October 10 p. m._--Last night I slept, but did not dream. I must have
slept soundly, for I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed; but the
sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day I feel terribly weak and
spiritless. I spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing.
In the afternoon Mr. Renfield asked if he might see me. Poor man, he was
very gentle, and when I came away he kissed my hand and bade God bless
me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying when I think of him. This
is a new weakness, of which I must be careful. Jonathan would be
miserable if he knew I had been crying. He and the others were out till
dinner-time, and they all came in tired. I did what I could to brighten
them up, and I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how
tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and all went off to smoke
together, as they said, but I knew that they wanted to tell each other
of what had occurred to each during the day; I could see from Jonathan's
manner that he had something important to communicate. I was not so
sleepy as I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to
give me a little opiate of some kind, as I had not slept well the night
before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to
me, telling me that it would do me no harm, as it was very mild.... I
have taken it, and am waiting for sleep, which still keeps aloof. I hope
I have not done wrong, for as sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear
comes: that I may have been foolish in thus depriving myself of the
power of waking. I might want it. Here comes sleep. Good-night.




CHAPTER XX

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 October, evening._--I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal
Green, but unhappily he was not in a condition to remember anything. The
very prospect of beer which my expected coming had opened to him had
proved too much, and he had begun too early on his expected debauch. I
learned, however, from his wife, who seemed a decent, poor soul, that he
was only the assistant to Smollet, who of the two mates was the
responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth, and found Mr. Joseph
Smollet at home and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a
saucer. He is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable
type of workman, and with a headpiece of his own. He remembered all
about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog's-eared
notebook, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the
seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick,
half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the boxes. There
were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from Carfax and left at
197, Chicksand Street, Mile End New Town, and another six which he
deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If then the Count meant to
scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London, these places were
chosen as the first of delivery, so that later he might distribute more
fully. The systematic manner in which this was done made me think that
he could not mean to confine himself to two sides of London. He was now
fixed on the far east of the northern shore, on the east of the southern
shore, and on the south. The north and west were surely never meant to
be left out of his diabolical scheme--let alone the City itself and the
very heart of fashionable London in the south-west and west. I went back
to Smollet, and asked him if he could tell us if any other boxes had
been taken from Carfax.

He replied:--

"Well, guv'nor, you've treated me wery 'an'some"--I had given him half a
sovereign--"an' I'll tell yer all I know. I heard a man by the name of
Bloxam say four nights ago in the 'Are an' 'Ounds, in Pincher's Alley,
as 'ow he an' his mate 'ad 'ad a rare dusty job in a old 'ouse at
Purfect. There ain't a-many such jobs as this 'ere, an' I'm thinkin'
that maybe Sam Bloxam could tell ye summut." I asked if he could tell me
where to find him. I told him that if he could get me the address it
would be worth another half-sovereign to him. So he gulped down the rest
of his tea and stood up, saying that he was going to begin the search
then and there. At the door he stopped, and said:--

"Look 'ere, guv'nor, there ain't no sense in me a-keepin' you 'ere. I
may find Sam soon, or I mayn't; but anyhow he ain't like to be in a way
to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze.
If you can give me a envelope with a stamp on it, and put yer address on
it, I'll find out where Sam is to be found and post it ye to-night. But
ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', or maybe ye won't ketch
'im; for Sam gets off main early, never mind the booze the night afore."

This was all practical, so one of the children went off with a penny to
buy an envelope and a sheet of paper, and to keep the change. When she
came back, I addressed the envelope and stamped it, and when Smollet had
again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my way
to home. We're on the track anyhow. I am tired to-night, and want sleep.
Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too pale; her eyes look as
though she had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be
kept in the dark, and it may make her doubly anxious about me and the
others. But it is best as it is. It is better to be disappointed and
worried in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. The doctors
were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful
business. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence
must rest. I shall not ever enter on the subject with her under any
circumstances. Indeed, it may not be a hard task, after all, for she
herself has become reticent on the subject, and has not spoken of the
Count or his doings ever since we told her of our decision.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 October, evening._--A long and trying and exciting day. By the first
post I got my directed envelope with a dirty scrap of paper enclosed, on
which was written with a carpenter's pencil in a sprawling hand:--

"Sam Bloxam, Korkrans, 4, Poters Cort, Bartel Street, Walworth. Arsk for
the depite."

I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy
and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to wake her,
but that, when I should return from this new search, I would arrange for
her going back to Exeter. I think she would be happier in our own home,
with her daily tasks to interest her, than in being here amongst us and
in ignorance. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, and told him where I
was off to, promising to come back and tell the rest so soon as I should
have found out anything. I drove to Walworth and found, with some
difficulty, Potter's Court. Mr. Smollet's spelling misled me, as I asked
for Poter's Court instead of Potter's Court. However, when I had found
the court, I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house.
When I asked the man who came to the door for the "depite," he shook his
head, and said: "I dunno 'im. There ain't no such a person 'ere; I never
'eard of 'im in all my bloomin' days. Don't believe there ain't nobody
of that kind livin' ere or anywheres." I took out Smollet's letter, and
as I read it it seemed to me that the lesson of the spelling of the name
of the court might guide me. "What are you?" I asked.

"I'm the depity," he answered. I saw at once that I was on the right
track; phonetic spelling had again misled me. A half-crown tip put the
deputy's knowledge at my disposal, and I learned that Mr. Bloxam, who
had slept off the remains of his beer on the previous night at
Corcoran's, had left for his work at Poplar at five o'clock that
morning. He could not tell me where the place of work was situated, but
he had a vague idea that it was some kind of a "new-fangled ware'us";
and with this slender clue I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve
o'clock before I got any satisfactory hint of such a building, and this
I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. One
of these suggested that there was being erected at Cross Angel Street a
new "cold storage" building; and as this suited the condition of a
"new-fangled ware'us," I at once drove to it. An interview with a surly
gatekeeper and a surlier foreman, both of whom were appeased with the
coin of the realm, put me on the track of Bloxam; he was sent for on my
suggesting that I was willing to pay his day's wages to his foreman for
the privilege of asking him a few questions on a private matter. He was
a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had
promised to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me
that he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Piccadilly,
and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main
heavy ones"--with a horse and cart hired by him for this purpose. I
asked him if he could tell me the number of the house in Piccadilly, to
which he replied:--

"Well, guv'nor, I forgits the number, but it was only a few doors from a
big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It was a
dusty old 'ouse, too, though nothin' to the dustiness of the 'ouse we
tooked the bloomin' boxes from."

"How did you get into the houses if they were both empty?"

"There was the old party what engaged me a-waitin' in the 'ouse at
Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift the boxes and put them in the dray. Curse
me, but he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller,
with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw
a shadder."

How this phrase thrilled through me!

"Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and
me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no
chicken, neither."

"How did you get into the house in Piccadilly?" I asked.

"He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for
when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door 'isself an' 'elped me
to carry the boxes into the 'all."

"The whole nine?" I asked.

"Yus; there was five in the first load an' four in the second. It was
main dry work, an' I don't so well remember 'ow I got 'ome." I
interrupted him:--

"Were the boxes left in the hall?"

"Yus; it was a big 'all, an' there was nothin' else in it." I made one
more attempt to further matters:--

"You didn't have any key?"

"Never used no key nor nothink. The old gent, he opened the door 'isself
an' shut it again when I druv off. I don't remember the last time--but
that was the beer."

"And you can't remember the number of the house?"

"No, sir. But ye needn't have no difficulty about that. It's a 'igh 'un
with a stone front with a bow on it, an' 'igh steps up to the door. I
know them steps, 'avin' 'ad to carry the boxes up with three loafers
what come round to earn a copper. The old gent give them shillin's, an'
they seein' they got so much, they wanted more; but 'e took one of them
by the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot
of them went away cussin'." I thought that with this description I could
find the house, so, having paid my friend for his information, I started
off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count
could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was
precious; for, now that he had achieved a certain amount of
distribution, he could, by choosing his own time, complete the task
unobserved. At Piccadilly Circus I discharged my cab, and walked
westward; beyond the Junior Constitutional I came across the house
described, and was satisfied that this was the next of the lairs
arranged by Dracula. The house looked as though it had been long
untenanted. The windows were encrusted with dust, and the shutters were
up. All the framework was black with time, and from the iron the paint
had mostly scaled away. It was evident that up to lately there had been
a large notice-board in front of the balcony; it had, however, been
roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining.
Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some loose boards,
whose raw edges looked white. I would have given a good deal to have
been able to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have
given some clue to the ownership of the house. I remembered my
experience of the investigation and purchase of Carfax, and I could not
but feel that if I could find the former owner there might be some means
discovered of gaining access to the house.

There was at present nothing to be learned from the Piccadilly side, and
nothing could be done; so I went round to the back to see if anything
could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the
Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two of the
grooms and helpers whom I saw around if they could tell me anything
about the empty house. One of them said that he heard it had lately been
taken, but he couldn't say from whom. He told me, however, that up to
very lately there had been a notice-board of "For Sale" up, and that
perhaps Mitchell, Sons, & Candy, the house agents, could tell me
something, as he thought he remembered seeing the name of that firm on
the board. I did not wish to seem too eager, or to let my informant know
or guess too much, so, thanking him in the usual manner, I strolled
away. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I
did not lose any time. Having learned the address of Mitchell, Sons, &
Candy from a directory at the Berkeley, I was soon at their office in
Sackville Street.

The gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but
uncommunicative in equal proportion. Having once told me that the
Piccadilly house--which throughout our interview he called a
"mansion"--was sold, he considered my business as concluded. When I
asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes a thought wider, and
paused a few seconds before replying:--

"It is sold, sir."

"Pardon me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a special reason
for wishing to know who purchased it."

Again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold,
sir," was again his laconic reply.

"Surely," I said, "you do not mind letting me know so much."

"But I do mind," he answered. "The affairs of their clients are
absolutely safe in the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy." This was
manifestly a prig of the first water, and there was no use arguing with
him. I thought I had best meet him on his own ground, so I said:--

"Your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian of their
confidence. I am myself a professional man." Here I handed him my card.
"In this instance I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of
Lord Godalming, who wishes to know something of the property which was,
he understood, lately for sale." These words put a different complexion
on affairs. He said:--

"I would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and especially would
I like to oblige his lordship. We once carried out a small matter of
renting some chambers for him when he was the Honourable Arthur
Holmwood. If you will let me have his lordship's address I will consult
the House on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his
lordship by to-night's post. It will be a pleasure if we can so far
deviate from our rules as to give the required information to his
lordship."

I wanted to secure a friend, and not to make an enemy, so I thanked him,
gave the address at Dr. Seward's and came away. It was now dark, and I
was tired and hungry. I got a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company
and came down to Purfleet by the next train.

I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she
made a gallant effort to be bright and cheerful, it wrung my heart to
think that I had had to keep anything from her and so caused her
inquietude. Thank God, this will be the last night of her looking on at
our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our
confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of
keeping her out of our grim task. She seems somehow more reconciled; or
else the very subject seems to have become repugnant to her, for when
any accidental allusion is made she actually shudders. I am glad we
made our resolution in time, as with such a feeling as this, our growing
knowledge would be torture to her.

I could not tell the others of the day's discovery till we were alone;
so after dinner--followed by a little music to save appearances even
amongst ourselves--I took Mina to her room and left her to go to bed.
The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and clung to me
as though she would detain me; but there was much to be talked of and I
came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no
difference between us.

When I came down again I found the others all gathered round the fire in
the study. In the train I had written my diary so far, and simply read
it off to them as the best means of letting them get abreast of my own
information; when I had finished Van Helsing said:--

"This has been a great day's work, friend Jonathan. Doubtless we are on
the track of the missing boxes. If we find them all in that house, then
our work is near the end. But if there be some missing, we must search
until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the
wretch to his real death." We all sat silent awhile and all at once Mr.
Morris spoke:--

"Say! how are we going to get into that house?"

"We got into the other," answered Lord Godalming quickly.

"But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night
and a walled park to protect us. It will be a mighty different thing to
commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't
see how we are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key
of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the
morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up and walked
about the room. By-and-by he stopped and said, turning from one to
another of us:--

"Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we
got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we
can find the Count's key basket."

As nothing could well be done before morning, and as it would be at
least advisable to wait till Lord Godalming should hear from Mitchell's,
we decided not to take any active step before breakfast time. For a good
while we sat and smoked, discussing the matter in its various lights and
bearings; I took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to the
moment. I am very sleepy and shall go to bed....

Just a line. Mina sleeps soundly and her breathing is regular. Her
forehead is puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks even
in her sleep. She is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she
did this morning. To-morrow will, I hope, mend all this; she will be
herself at home in Exeter. Oh, but I am sleepy!


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_1 October._--I am puzzled afresh about Renfield. His moods change so
rapidly that I find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they
always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more
than interesting study. This morning, when I went to see him after his
repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding destiny.
He was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not really
care for any of the things of mere earth; he was in the clouds and
looked down on all the weaknesses and wants of us poor mortals. I
thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I asked
him:--

"What about the flies these times?" He smiled on me in quite a superior
sort of way--such a smile as would have become the face of Malvolio--as
he answered me:--

"The fly, my dear sir, has one striking feature; its wings are typical
of the aërial powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well
when they typified the soul as a butterfly!"

I thought I would push his analogy to its utmost logically, so I said
quickly:--

"Oh, it is a soul you are after now, is it?" His madness foiled his
reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face as, shaking his head
with a decision which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:--

"Oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all I want." Here he brightened
up; "I am pretty indifferent about it at present. Life is all right; I
have all I want. You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to
study zoöphagy!"

This puzzled me a little, so I drew him on:--

"Then you command life; you are a god, I suppose?" He smiled with an
ineffably benign superiority.

"Oh no! Far be it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the
Deity. I am not even concerned in His especially spiritual doings. If I
may state my intellectual position I am, so far as concerns things
purely terrestrial, somewhat in the position which Enoch occupied
spiritually!" This was a poser to me. I could not at the moment recall
Enoch's appositeness; so I had to ask a simple question, though I felt
that by so doing I was lowering myself in the eyes of the lunatic:--

"And why with Enoch?"

"Because he walked with God." I could not see the analogy, but did not
like to admit it; so I harked back to what he had denied:--

"So you don't care about life and you don't want souls. Why not?" I put
my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him.
The effort succeeded; for an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his
old servile manner, bent low before me, and actually fawned upon me as
he replied:--

"I don't want any souls, indeed, indeed! I don't. I couldn't use them if
I had them; they would be no manner of use to me. I couldn't eat them
or----" He suddenly stopped and the old cunning look spread over his
face, like a wind-sweep on the surface of the water. "And doctor, as to
life, what is it after all? When you've got all you require, and you
know that you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good
friends--like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a leer of
inexpressible cunning. "I know that I shall never lack the means of
life!"

I think that through the cloudiness of his insanity he saw some
antagonism in me, for he at once fell back on the last refuge of such as
he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that for the present it
was useless to speak to him. He was sulky, and so I came away.

Later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not have come
without special reason, but just at present I am so interested in him
that I would gladly make an effort. Besides, I am glad to have anything
to help to pass the time. Harker is out, following up clues; and so are
Lord Godalming and Quincey. Van Helsing sits in my study poring over the
record prepared by the Harkers; he seems to think that by accurate
knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. He does not wish
to be disturbed in the work, without cause. I would have taken him with
me to see the patient, only I thought that after his last repulse he
might not care to go again. There was also another reason: Renfield
might not speak so freely before a third person as when he and I were
alone.

I found him sitting out in the middle of the floor on his stool, a pose
which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. When I
came in, he said at once, as though the question had been waiting on his
lips:--

"What about souls?" It was evident then that my surmise had been
correct. Unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with the
lunatic. I determined to have the matter out. "What about them
yourself?" I asked. He did not reply for a moment but looked all round
him, and up and down, as though he expected to find some inspiration for
an answer.

"I don't want any souls!" he said in a feeble, apologetic way. The
matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I determined to use it--to "be
cruel only to be kind." So I said:--

"You like life, and you want life?"

"Oh yes! but that is all right; you needn't worry about that!"

"But," I asked, "how are we to get the life without getting the soul
also?" This seemed to puzzle him, so I followed it up:--

"A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with
the souls of thousands of flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing
and twittering and miauing all round you. You've got their lives, you
know, and you must put up with their souls!" Something seemed to affect
his imagination, for he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes,
screwing them up tightly just as a small boy does when his face is being
soaped. There was something pathetic in it that touched me; it also gave
me a lesson, for it seemed that before me was a child--only a child,
though the features were worn, and the stubble on the jaws was white. It
was evident that he was undergoing some process of mental disturbance,
and, knowing how his past moods had interpreted things seemingly foreign
to himself, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I could and
go with him. The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him,
speaking pretty loud so that he would hear me through his closed ears:--

"Would you like some sugar to get your flies round again?" He seemed to
wake up all at once, and shook his head. With a laugh he replied:--

"Not much! flies are poor things, after all!" After a pause he added,
"But I don't want their souls buzzing round me, all the same."

"Or spiders?" I went on.

"Blow spiders! What's the use of spiders? There isn't anything in them
to eat or"--he stopped suddenly, as though reminded of a forbidden
topic.

"So, so!" I thought to myself, "this is the second time he has suddenly
stopped at the word 'drink'; what does it mean?" Renfield seemed himself
aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried on, as though to distract
my attention from it:--

"I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such
small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they
might be called. I'm past all that sort of nonsense. You might as well
ask a man to eat molecules with a pair of chop-sticks, as to try to
interest me about the lesser carnivora, when I know of what is before
me."

"I see," I said. "You want big things that you can make your teeth meet
in? How would you like to breakfast on elephant?"

"What ridiculous nonsense you are talking!" He was getting too wide
awake, so I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said
reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!"

The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once fell from his
high-horse and became a child again.

"I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a
few moments he sat despondently. Suddenly he jumped to his feet, with
his eyes blazing and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To
hell with you and your souls!" he shouted. "Why do you plague me about
souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already,
without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he was
in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant,
however, that I did so he became calm, and said apologetically:--

"Forgive me, Doctor; I forgot myself. You do not need any help. I am so
worried in my mind that I am apt to be irritable. If you only knew the
problem I have to face, and that I am working out, you would pity, and
tolerate, and pardon me. Pray do not put me in a strait-waistcoat. I
want to think and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am
sure you will understand!" He had evidently self-control; so when the
attendants came I told them not to mind, and they withdrew. Renfield
watched them go; when the door was closed he said, with considerable
dignity and sweetness:--

"Dr. Seward, you have been very considerate towards me. Believe me that
I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it well to leave him in this
mood, and so I came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in
this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American
interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get them in proper order.
Here they are:--

Will not mention "drinking."

Fears the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything.

Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future.

Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being
haunted by their souls.

Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind
that he will acquire some higher life. He dreads the consequence--the
burden of a soul. Then it is a human life he looks to!

And the assurance--?

Merciful God! the Count has been to him, and there is some new scheme of
terror afoot!

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing and told him my
suspicion. He grew very grave; and, after thinking the matter over for a
while asked me to take him to Renfield. I did so. As we came to the door
we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to do in the time
which now seems so long ago. When we entered we saw with amazement that
he had spread out his sugar as of old; the flies, lethargic with the
autumn, were beginning to buzz into the room. We tried to make him talk
of the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not attend. He
went on with his singing, just as though we had not been present. He had
got a scrap of paper and was folding it into a note-book. We had to come
away as ignorant as we went in.

His is a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night.


_Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming._

_"1 October._

"My Lord,

"We are at all times only too happy to meet your wishes. We beg, with
regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your
behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and
purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors
of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign
nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the
purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lordship will pardon
us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever
of him.

"We are, my Lord,

"Your Lordship's humble servants,

"MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_2 October._--I placed a man in the corridor last night, and told him to
make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room,
and gave him instructions that if there should be anything strange he
was to call me. After dinner, when we had all gathered round the fire
in the study--Mrs. Harker having gone to bed--we discussed the attempts
and discoveries of the day. Harker was the only one who had any result,
and we are in great hopes that his clue may be an important one.

Before going to bed I went round to the patient's room and looked in
through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his heart
rose and fell with regular respiration.

This morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after midnight
he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him
if that was all; he replied that it was all he heard. There was
something about his manner so suspicious that I asked him point blank if
he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for
a while. It is too bad that men cannot be trusted unless they are
watched.

To-day Harker is out following up his clue, and Art and Quincey are
looking after horses. Godalming thinks that it will be well to have
horses always in readiness, for when we get the information which we
seek there will be no time to lose. We must sterilise all the imported
earth between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at his
weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is off to the
British Museum looking up some authorities on ancient medicine. The old
physicians took account of things which their followers do not accept,
and the Professor is searching for witch and demon cures which may be
useful to us later.

I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity in
strait-waistcoats.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--We have met again. We seem at last to be on the track, and our
work of to-morrow may be the beginning of the end. I wonder if
Renfield's quiet has anything to do with this. His moods have so
followed the doings of the Count, that the coming destruction of the
monster may be carried to him in some subtle way. If we could only get
some hint as to what passed in his mind, between the time of my argument
with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a
valuable clue. He is now seemingly quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That
wild yell seemed to come from his room....

       *       *       *       *       *

The attendant came bursting into my room and told me that Renfield had
somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he went
to him found him lying on his face on the floor, all covered with blood.
I must go at once....




CHAPTER XXI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_3 October._--Let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well
as I can remember it, since last I made an entry. Not a detail that I
can recall must be forgotten; in all calmness I must proceed.

When I came to Renfield's room I found him lying on the floor on his
left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I went to move him, it
became at once apparent that he had received some terrible injuries;
there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the body
which marks even lethargic sanity. As the face was exposed I could see
that it was horribly bruised, as though it had been beaten against the
floor--indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool of blood
originated. The attendant who was kneeling beside the body said to me as
we turned him over:--

"I think, sir, his back is broken. See, both his right arm and leg and
the whole side of his face are paralysed." How such a thing could have
happened puzzled the attendant beyond measure. He seemed quite
bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:--

"I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by
beating his own head on the floor. I saw a young woman do it once at the
Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I suppose he
might have broke his neck by falling out of bed, if he got in an awkward
kink. But for the life of me I can't imagine how the two things
occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his
face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be marks of
it." I said to him:--

"Go to Dr. Van Helsing, and ask him to kindly come here at once. I want
him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a few
minutes the Professor, in his dressing gown and slippers, appeared. When
he saw Renfield on the ground, he looked keenly at him a moment, and
then turned to me. I think he recognised my thought in my eyes, for he
said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:--

"Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much
attention. I shall stay with you myself; but I shall first dress myself.
If you will remain I shall in a few minutes join you."

The patient was now breathing stertorously and it was easy to see that
he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned with
extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a surgical case. He had
evidently been thinking and had his mind made up; for, almost before he
looked at the patient, he whispered to me:--

"Send the attendant away. We must be alone with him when he becomes
conscious, after the operation." So I said:--

"I think that will do now, Simmons. We have done all that we can at
present. You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing will operate.
Let me know instantly if there be anything unusual anywhere."

The man withdrew, and we went into a strict examination of the patient.
The wounds of the face was superficial; the real injury was a depressed
fracture of the skull, extending right up through the motor area. The
Professor thought a moment and said:--

"We must reduce the pressure and get back to normal conditions, as far
as can be; the rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature of
his injury. The whole motor area seems affected. The suffusion of the
brain will increase quickly, so we must trephine at once or it may be
too late." As he was speaking there was a soft tapping at the door. I
went over and opened it and found in the corridor without, Arthur and
Quincey in pajamas and slippers: the former spoke:--

"I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing and tell him of an accident.
So I woke Quincey or rather called for him as he was not asleep. Things
are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us
these times. I've been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things
as they have been. We'll have to look back--and forward a little more
than we have done. May we come in?" I nodded, and held the door open
till they had entered; then I closed it again. When Quincey saw the
attitude and state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the
floor, he said softly:--

"My God! what has happened to him? Poor, poor devil!" I told him
briefly, and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after
the operation--for a short time, at all events. He went at once and sat
down on the edge of the bed, with Godalming beside him; we all watched
in patience.

"We shall wait," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to fix the best
spot for trephining, so that we may most quickly and perfectly remove
the blood clot; for it is evident that the hæmorrhage is increasing."

The minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. I had a
horrible sinking in my heart, and from Van Helsing's face I gathered
that he felt some fear or apprehension as to what was to come. I dreaded
the words that Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think;
but the conviction of what was coming was on me, as I have read of men
who have heard the death-watch. The poor man's breathing came in
uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as though he would open his eyes
and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he
would relapse into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was to sick
beds and death, this suspense grew, and grew upon me. I could almost
hear the beating of my own heart; and the blood surging through my
temples sounded like blows from a hammer. The silence finally became
agonising. I looked at my companions, one after another, and saw from
their flushed faces and damp brows that they were enduring equal
torture. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead
some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect
it.

At last there came a time when it was evident that the patient was
sinking fast; he might die at any moment. I looked up at the Professor
and caught his eyes fixed on mine. His face was sternly set as he
spoke:--

"There is no time to lose. His words may be worth many lives; I have
been thinking so, as I stood here. It may be there is a soul at stake!
We shall operate just above the ear."

Without another word he made the operation. For a few moments the
breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came a breath so
prolonged that it seemed as though it would tear open his chest.
Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare.
This was continued for a few moments; then it softened into a glad
surprise, and from the lips came a sigh of relief. He moved
convulsively, and as he did so, said:--

"I'll be quiet, Doctor. Tell them to take off the strait-waistcoat. I
have had a terrible dream, and it has left me so weak that I cannot
move. What's wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts
dreadfully." He tried to turn his head; but even with the effort his
eyes seemed to grow glassy again so I gently put it back. Then Van
Helsing said in a quiet grave tone:--

"Tell us your dream, Mr. Renfield." As he heard the voice his face
brightened, through its mutilation, and he said:--

"That is Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you to be here. Give me some
water, my lips are dry; and I shall try to tell you. I dreamed"--he
stopped and seemed fainting, I called quietly to Quincey--"The
brandy--it is in my study--quick!" He flew and returned with a glass,
the decanter of brandy and a carafe of water. We moistened the parched
lips, and the patient quickly revived. It seemed, however, that his poor
injured brain had been working in the interval, for, when he was quite
conscious, he looked at me piercingly with an agonised confusion which I
shall never forget, and said:--

"I must not deceive myself; it was no dream, but all a grim reality."
Then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the two
figures sitting patiently on the edge of the bed he went on:--

"If I were not sure already, I would know from them." For an instant his
eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he were
bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened them he said,
hurriedly, and with more energy than he had yet displayed:--

"Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that I have but a few minutes;
and then I must go back to death--or worse! Wet my lips with brandy
again. I have something that I must say before I die; or before my poor
crushed brain dies anyhow. Thank you! It was that night after you left
me, when I implored you to let me go away. I couldn't speak then, for I
felt my tongue was tied; but I was as sane then, except in that way, as
I am now. I was in an agony of despair for a long time after you left
me; it seemed hours. Then there came a sudden peace to me. My brain
seemed to become cool again, and I realised where I was. I heard the
dogs bark behind our house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, Van
Helsing's eyes never blinked, but his hand came out and met mine and
gripped it hard. He did not, however, betray himself; he nodded slightly
and said: "Go on," in a low voice. Renfield proceeded:--

"He came up to the window in the mist, as I had seen him often before;
but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce like a
man's when angry. He was laughing with his red mouth; the sharp white
teeth glinted in the moonlight when he turned to look back over the belt
of trees, to where the dogs were barking. I wouldn't ask him to come in
at first, though I knew he wanted to--just as he had wanted all along.
Then he began promising me things--not in words but by doing them." He
was interrupted by a word from the Professor:--

"How?"

"By making them happen; just as he used to send in the flies when the
sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their
wings; and big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their
backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as he whispered to me unconsciously:--

"The _Acherontia Aitetropos of the Sphinges_--what you call the
'Death's-head Moth'?" The patient went on without stopping.

"Then he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands,
millions of them, and every one a life; and dogs to eat them, and cats
too. All lives! all red blood, with years of life in it; and not merely
buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I wanted to see what he could do.
Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He
beckoned me to the window. I got up and looked out, and He raised his
hands, and seemed to call out without using any words. A dark mass
spread over the grass, coming on like the shape of a flame of fire; and
then He moved the mist to the right and left, and I could see that there
were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red--like His, only
smaller. He held up his hand, and they all stopped; and I thought he
seemed to be saying: 'All these lives will I give you, ay, and many more
and greater, through countless ages, if you will fall down and worship
me!' And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close
over my eyes; and before I knew what I was doing, I found myself opening
the sash and saying to Him: 'Come in, Lord and Master!' The rats were
all gone, but He slid into the room through the sash, though it was only
open an inch wide--just as the Moon herself has often come in through
the tiniest crack and has stood before me in all her size and
splendour."

His voice was weaker, so I moistened his lips with the brandy again, and
he continued; but it seemed as though his memory had gone on working in
the interval for his story was further advanced. I was about to call him
back to the point, but Van Helsing whispered to me: "Let him go on. Do
not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at all
if once he lost the thread of his thought." He proceeded:--

"All day I waited to hear from him, but he did not send me anything, not
even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him.
When he slid in through the window, though it was shut, and did not even
knock, I got mad with him. He sneered at me, and his white face looked
out of the mist with his red eyes gleaming, and he went on as though he
owned the whole place, and I was no one. He didn't even smell the same
as he went by me. I couldn't hold him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs.
Harker had come into the room."

The two men sitting on the bed stood up and came over, standing behind
him so that he could not see them, but where they could hear better.
They were both silent, but the Professor started and quivered; his face,
however, grew grimmer and sterner still. Renfield went on without
noticing:--

"When Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon she wasn't the same;
it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved,
but no one said a word; he went on:--

"I didn't know that she was here till she spoke; and she didn't look the
same. I don't care for the pale people; I like them with lots of blood
in them, and hers had all seemed to have run out. I didn't think of it
at the time; but when she went away I began to think, and it made me mad
to know that He had been taking the life out of her." I could feel that
the rest quivered, as I did, but we remained otherwise still. "So when
He came to-night I was ready for Him. I saw the mist stealing in, and I
grabbed it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and
as I knew I was a madman--at times anyhow--I resolved to use my power.
Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come out of the mist to struggle
with me. I held tight; and I thought I was going to win, for I didn't
mean Him to take any more of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned
into me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and
when I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There
was a red cloud before me, and a noise like thunder, and the mist seemed
to steal away under the door." His voice was becoming fainter and his
breath more stertorous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively.

"We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and we know his purpose.
It may not be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were the other
night, but lose no time; there is not an instant to spare." There was no
need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in
common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we
had when we entered the Count's house. The Professor had his ready, and
as we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:--

"They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is
over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common enemy that we deal with.
Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina should suffer!" He stopped; his
voice was breaking, and I do not know if rage or terror predominated in
my own heart.

Outside the Harkers' door we paused. Art and Quincey held back, and the
latter said:--

"Should we disturb her?"

"We must," said Van Helsing grimly. "If the door be locked, I shall
break it in."

"May it not frighten her terribly? It is unusual to break into a lady's
room!"

Van Helsing said solemnly, "You are always right; but this is life and
death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they
are all as one to me to-night. Friend John, when I turn the handle, if
the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you
too, my friends. Now!"

He turned the handle as he spoke, but the door did not yield. We threw
ourselves against it; with a crash it burst open, and we almost fell
headlong into the room. The Professor did actually fall, and I saw
across him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees. What I saw
appalled me. I felt my hair rise like bristles on the back of my neck,
and my heart seemed to stand still.

The moonlight was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the room
was light enough to see. On the bed beside the window lay Jonathan
Harker, his face flushed and breathing heavily as though in a stupor.
Kneeling on the near edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad
figure of his wife. By her side stood a tall, thin man, clad in black.
His face was turned from us, but the instant we saw we all recognised
the Count--in every way, even to the scar on his forehead. With his left
hand he held both Mrs. Harker's hands, keeping them away with her arms
at full tension; his right hand gripped her by the back of the neck,
forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared
with blood, and a thin stream trickled down the man's bare breast which
was shown by his torn-open dress. The attitude of the two had a terrible
resemblance to a child forcing a kitten's nose into a saucer of milk to
compel it to drink. As we burst into the room, the Count turned his
face, and the hellish look that I had heard described seemed to leap
into it. His eyes flamed red with devilish passion; the great nostrils
of the white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge; and the
white sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood-dripping mouth,
champed together like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw
his victim back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned
and sprang at us. But by this time the Professor had gained his feet,
and was holding towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred
Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside
the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we,
lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a
great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the gaslight sprang up
under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we
looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting
open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved
forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with
it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so despairing that it
seems to me now that it will ring in my ears till my dying day. For a
few seconds she lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was
ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which smeared
her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of
blood; her eyes were mad with terror. Then she put before her face her
poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark of the
Count's terrible grip, and from behind them came a low desolate wail
which made the terrible scream seem only the quick expression of an
endless grief. Van Helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently
over her body, whilst Art, after looking at her face for an instant
despairingly, ran out of the room. Van Helsing whispered to me:--

"Jonathan is in a stupor such as we know the Vampire can produce. We can
do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few moments till she recovers
herself; I must wake him!" He dipped the end of a towel in cold water
and with it began to flick him on the face, his wife all the while
holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that was
heart-breaking to hear. I raised the blind, and looked out of the
window. There was much moonshine; and as I looked I could see Quincey
Morris run across the lawn and hide himself in the shadow of a great
yew-tree. It puzzled me to think why he was doing this; but at the
instant I heard Harker's quick exclamation as he woke to partial
consciousness, and turned to the bed. On his face, as there might well
be, was a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a few seconds, and
then full consciousness seemed to burst upon him all at once, and he
started up. His wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned to
him with her arms stretched out, as though to embrace him; instantly,
however, she drew them in again, and putting her elbows together, held
her hands before her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook.

"In God's name what does this mean?" Harker cried out. "Dr. Seward, Dr.
Van Helsing, what is it? What has happened? What is wrong? Mina, dear,
what is it? What does that blood mean? My God, my God! has it come to
this!" and, raising himself to his knees, he beat his hands wildly
together. "Good God help us! help her! oh, help her!" With a quick
movement he jumped from bed, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the
man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened?
Tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, you
love Mina, I know. Oh, do something to save her. It cannot have gone too
far yet. Guard her while I look for _him_!" His wife, through her terror
and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantly
forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and cried out:--

"No! no! Jonathan, you must not leave me. I have suffered enough
to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must stay
with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over you!" Her
expression became frantic as she spoke; and, he yielding to her, she
pulled him down sitting on the bed side, and clung to him fiercely.

Van Helsing and I tried to calm them both. The Professor held up his
little golden crucifix, and said with wonderful calmness:--

"Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to you no
foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must be calm
and take counsel together." She shuddered and was silent, holding down
her head on her husband's breast. When she raised it, his white
night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where
the thin open wound in her neck had sent forth drops. The instant she
saw it she drew back, with a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking
sobs:--

"Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it
should be that it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may have
most cause to fear." To this he spoke out resolutely:--

"Nonsense, Mina. It is a shame to me to hear such a word. I would not
hear it of you; and I shall not hear it from you. May God judge me by my
deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour,
if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!" He put out
his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a while she lay there
sobbing. He looked at us over her bowed head, with eyes that blinked
damply above his quivering nostrils; his mouth was set as steel. After a
while her sobs became less frequent and more faint, and then he said to
me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous
power to the utmost:--

"And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about it. Too well I know the broad
fact; tell me all that has been." I told him exactly what had happened,
and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched
and his eyes blazed as I told how the ruthless hands of the Count had
held his wife in that terrible and horrid position, with her mouth to
the open wound in his breast. It interested me, even at that moment, to
see, that, whilst the face of white set passion worked convulsively over
the bowed head, the hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled
hair. Just as I had finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at the door.
They entered in obedience to our summons. Van Helsing looked at me
questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to take advantage of
their coming to divert if possible the thoughts of the unhappy husband
and wife from each other and from themselves; so on nodding acquiescence
to him he asked them what they had seen or done. To which Lord Godalming
answered:--

"I could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any of our rooms. I
looked in the study but, though he had been there, he had gone. He had,
however----" He stopped suddenly, looking at the poor drooping figure on
the bed. Van Helsing said gravely:--

"Go on, friend Arthur. We want here no more concealments. Our hope now
is in knowing all. Tell freely!" So Art went on:--

"He had been there, and though it could only have been for a few
seconds, he made rare hay of the place. All the manuscript had been
burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white ashes; the
cylinders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, and the wax
had helped the flames." Here I interrupted. "Thank God there is the
other copy in the safe!" His face lit for a moment, but fell again as he
went on: "I ran downstairs then, but could see no sign of him. I looked
into Renfield's room; but there was no trace there except----!" Again he
paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and
moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor fellow
is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the other of
us she said solemnly:--

"God's will be done!" I could not but feel that Art was keeping back
something; but, as I took it that it was with a purpose, I said nothing.
Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:--

"And you, friend Quincey, have you any to tell?"

"A little," he answered. "It may be much eventually, but at present I
can't say. I thought it well to know if possible where the Count would
go when he left the house. I did not see him; but I saw a bat rise from
Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to see him in some
shape go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He
will not be back to-night; for the sky is reddening in the east, and the
dawn is close. We must work to-morrow!"

He said the latter words through his shut teeth. For a space of perhaps
a couple of minutes there was silence, and I could fancy that I could
hear the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his
hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker's head:--

"And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina--tell us exactly what
happened. God knows that I do not want that you be pained; but it is
need that we know all. For now more than ever has all work to be done
quick and sharp, and in deadly earnest. The day is close to us that must
end all, if it may be so; and now is the chance that we may live and
learn."

The poor, dear lady shivered, and I could see the tension of her nerves
as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her head lower and
lower still on his breast. Then she raised her head proudly, and held
out one hand to Van Helsing who took it in his, and, after stooping and
kissing it reverently, held it fast. The other hand was locked in that
of her husband, who held his other arm thrown round her protectingly.
After a pause in which she was evidently ordering her thoughts, she
began:--

"I took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but for a
long time it did not act. I seemed to become more wakeful, and myriads
of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon my mind--all of them
connected with death, and vampires; with blood, and pain, and trouble."
Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned to him and said
lovingly: "Do not fret, dear. You must be brave and strong, and help me
through the horrible task. If you only knew what an effort it is to me
to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much I
need your help. Well, I saw I must try to help the medicine to its work
with my will, if it was to do me any good, so I resolutely set myself to
sleep. Sure enough sleep must soon have come to me, for I remember no
more. Jonathan coming in had not waked me, for he lay by my side when
next I remember. There was in the room the same thin white mist that I
had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find
it in my diary which I shall show you later. I felt the same vague
terror which had come to me before and the same sense of some presence.
I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he slept so soundly that it
seemed as if it was he who had taken the sleeping draught, and not I. I
tried, but I could not wake him. This caused me a great fear, and I
looked around terrified. Then indeed, my heart sank within me: beside
the bed, as if he had stepped out of the mist--or rather as if the mist
had turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a
tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once from the description of
the others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the light
fell in a thin white line; the parted red lips, with the sharp white
teeth showing between; and the red eyes that I had seemed to see in the
sunset on the windows of St. Mary's Church at Whitby. I knew, too, the
red scar on his forehead where Jonathan had struck him. For an instant
my heart stood still, and I would have screamed out, only that I was
paralysed. In the pause he spoke in a sort of keen, cutting whisper,
pointing as he spoke to Jonathan:--

"'Silence! If you make a sound I shall take him and dash his brains out
before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or
say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder
and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did
so, 'First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well
be quiet; it is not the first time, or the second, that your veins have
appeased my thirst!' I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not
want to hinder him. I suppose it is a part of the horrible curse that
such is, when his touch is on his victim. And oh, my God, my God, pity
me! He placed his reeking lips upon my throat!" Her husband groaned
again. She clasped his hand harder, and looked at him pityingly, as if
he were the injured one, and went on:--

"I felt my strength fading away, and I was in a half swoon. How long
this horrible thing lasted I know not; but it seemed that a long time
must have passed before he took his foul, awful, sneering mouth away. I
saw it drip with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while to
overpower her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her
husband's sustaining arm. With a great effort she recovered herself and
went on:--

"Then he spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play
your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and
frustrate me in my designs! You know now, and they know in part already,
and will know in full before long, what it is to cross my path. They
should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they
played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued
for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they were
born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now
to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful
wine-press for a while; and shall be later on my companion and my
helper. You shall be avenged in turn; for not one of them but shall
minister to your needs. But as yet you are to be punished for what you
have done. You have aided in thwarting me; now you shall come to my
call. When my brain says "Come!" to you, you shall cross land or sea to
do my bidding; and to that end this!' With that he pulled open his
shirt, and with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. When
the blood began to spurt out, he took my hands in one of his, holding
them tight, and with the other seized my neck and pressed my mouth to
the wound, so that I must either suffocate or swallow some of the---- Oh
my God! my God! what have I done? What have I done to deserve such a
fate, I who have tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all my
days. God pity me! Look down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril;
and in mercy pity those to whom she is dear!" Then she began to rub her
lips as though to cleanse them from pollution.

As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken,
and everything became more and more clear. Harker was still and quiet;
but over his face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look
which deepened and deepened in the morning light, till when the first
red streak of the coming dawn shot up, the flesh stood darkly out
against the whitening hair.

We have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy
pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action.

Of this I am sure: the sun rises to-day on no more miserable house in
all the great round of its daily course.




CHAPTER XXII

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_3 October._--As I must do something or go mad, I write this diary. It
is now six o'clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour and
take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward are agreed
that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. Our best will be, God
knows, required to-day. I must keep writing at every chance, for I dare
not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end
the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big or little, could
not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However,
we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me just now, with the tears
running down her dear cheeks, that it is in trouble and trial that our
faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us
up to the end. The end! oh my God! what end?... To work! To work!

When Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward had come back from seeing poor
Renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. First, Dr. Seward
told us that when he and Dr. Van Helsing had gone down to the room below
they had found Renfield lying on the floor, all in a heap. His face was
all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were broken.

Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he had
heard anything. He said that he had been sitting down--he confessed to
half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the room, and then Renfield
had called out loudly several times, "God! God! God!" after that there
was a sound of falling, and when he entered the room he found him lying
on the floor, face down, just as the doctors had seen him. Van Helsing
asked if he had heard "voices" or "a voice," and he said he could not
say; that at first it had seemed to him as if there were two, but as
there was no one in the room it could have been only one. He could swear
to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr.
Seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go into
the matter; the question of an inquest had to be considered, and it
would never do to put forward the truth, as no one would believe it. As
it was, he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a
certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the
coroner should demand it, there would be a formal inquest, necessarily
to the same result.

When the question began to be discussed as to what should be our next
step, the very first thing we decided was that Mina should be in full
confidence; that nothing of any sort--no matter how painful--should be
kept from her. She herself agreed as to its wisdom, and it was pitiful
to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth of
despair. "There must be no concealment," she said, "Alas! we have had
too much already. And besides there is nothing in all the world that can
give me more pain than I have already endured--than I suffer now!
Whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!"
Van Helsing was looking at her fixedly as she spoke, and said, suddenly
but quietly:--

"But dear Madam Mina, are you not afraid; not for yourself, but for
others from yourself, after what has happened?" Her face grew set in its
lines, but her eyes shone with the devotion of a martyr as she
answered:--

"Ah no! for my mind is made up!"

"To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were all very still; for each in
our own way we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant. Her answer
came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:--

"Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of
harm to any that I love, I shall die!"

"You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely.

"I would; if there were no friend who loved me, who would save me such a
pain, and so desperate an effort!" She looked at him meaningly as she
spoke. He was sitting down; but now he rose and came close to her and
put his hand on her head as he said solemnly:

"My child, there is such an one if it were for your good. For myself I
could hold it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for you,
even at this moment if it were best. Nay, were it safe! But my
child----" For a moment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in his
throat; he gulped it down and went on:--

"There are here some who would stand between you and death. You must not
die. You must not die by any hand; but least of all by your own. Until
the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must not
die; for if he is still with the quick Un-Dead, your death would make
you even as he is. No, you must live! You must struggle and strive to
live, though death would seem a boon unspeakable. You must fight Death
himself, though he come to you in pain or in joy; by the day, or the
night; in safety or in peril! On your living soul I charge you that you
do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past." The
poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have seen a
quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. We were all
silent; we could do nothing. At length she grew more calm and turning to
him said, sweetly, but oh! so sorrowfully, as she held out her hand:--

"I promise you, my dear friend, that if God will let me live, I shall
strive to do so; till, if it may be in His good time, this horror may
have passed away from me." She was so good and brave that we all felt
that our hearts were strengthened to work and endure for her, and we
began to discuss what we were to do. I told her that she was to have all
the papers in the safe, and all the papers or diaries and phonographs we
might hereafter use; and was to keep the record as she had done before.
She was pleased with the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could
be used in connection with so grim an interest.

As usual Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was
prepared with an exact ordering of our work.

"It is perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to
Carfax we decided not to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay
there. Had we done so, the Count must have guessed our purpose, and
would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an
effort with regard to the others; but now he does not know our
intentions. Nay, more, in all probability, he does not know that such a
power exists to us as can sterilise his lairs, so that he cannot use
them as of old. We are now so much further advanced in our knowledge as
to their disposition that, when we have examined the house in
Piccadilly, we may track the very last of them. To-day, then, is ours;
and in it rests our hope. The sun that rose on our sorrow this morning
guards us in its course. Until it sets to-night, that monster must
retain whatever form he now has. He is confined within the limitations
of his earthly envelope. He cannot melt into thin air nor disappear
through cracks or chinks or crannies. If he go through a doorway, he
must open the door like a mortal. And so we have this day to hunt out
all his lairs and sterilise them. So we shall, if we have not yet catch
him and destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catching
and the destroying shall be, in time, sure." Here I started up for I
could not contain myself at the thought that the minutes and seconds so
preciously laden with Mina's life and happiness were flying from us,
since whilst we talked action was impossible. But Van Helsing held up
his hand warningly. "Nay, friend Jonathan," he said, "in this, the
quickest way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. We shall all
act and act with desperate quick, when the time has come. But think, in
all probable the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly.
The Count may have many houses which he has bought. Of them he will have
deeds of purchase, keys and other things. He will have paper that he
write on; he will have his book of cheques. There are many belongings
that he must have somewhere; why not in this place so central, so quiet,
where he come and go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the
very vast of the traffic there is none to notice. We shall go there and
search that house; and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our
friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we
run down our old fox--so? is it not?"

"Then let us come at once," I cried, "we are wasting the precious,
precious time!" The Professor did not move, but simply said:--

"And how are we to get into that house in Piccadilly?"

"Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be."

"And your police; where will they be, and what will they say?"

I was staggered; but I knew that if he wished to delay he had a good
reason for it. So I said, as quietly as I could:--

"Don't wait more than need be; you know, I am sure, what torture I am
in."

"Ah, my child, that I do; and indeed there is no wish of me to add to
your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world be at
movement. Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it
seems to me that the simplest way is the best of all. Now we wish to get
into the house, but we have no key; is it not so?" I nodded.

"Now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and could
not still get it; and think there was to you no conscience of the
housebreaker, what would you do?"

"I should get a respectable locksmith, and set him to work to pick the
lock for me."

"And your police, they would interfere, would they not?"

"Oh, no! not if they knew the man was properly employed."

"Then," he looked at me as keenly as he spoke, "all that is in doubt is
the conscience of the employer, and the belief of your policemen as to
whether or no that employer has a good conscience or a bad one. Your
police must indeed be zealous men and clever--oh, so clever!--in reading
the heart, that they trouble themselves in such matter. No, no, my
friend Jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty house in this
your London, or of any city in the world; and if you do it as such
things are rightly done, and at the time such things are rightly done,
no one will interfere. I have read of a gentleman who owned a so fine
house in London, and when he went for months of summer to Switzerland
and lock up his house, some burglar came and broke window at back and
got in. Then he went and made open the shutters in front and walk out
and in through the door, before the very eyes of the police. Then he
have an auction in that house, and advertise it, and put up big notice;
and when the day come he sell off by a great auctioneer all the goods of
that other man who own them. Then he go to a builder, and he sell him
that house, making an agreement that he pull it down and take all away
within a certain time. And your police and other authority help him all
they can. And when that owner come back from his holiday in Switzerland
he find only an empty hole where his house had been. This was all done
_en règle_; and in our work we shall be _en règle_ too. We shall not go
so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, shall deem
it strange; but we shall go after ten o'clock, when there are many
about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of the
house."

I could not but see how right he was and the terrible despair of Mina's
face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in such good counsel. Van
Helsing went on:--

"When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate some of
us can remain there whilst the rest find the other places where there be
more earth-boxes--at Bermondsey and Mile End."

Lord Godalming stood up. "I can be of some use here," he said. "I shall
wire to my people to have horses and carriages where they will be most
convenient."

"Look here, old fellow," said Morris, "it is a capital idea to have all
ready in case we want to go horsebacking; but don't you think that one
of your snappy carriages with its heraldic adornments in a byway of
Walworth or Mile End would attract too much attention for our purposes?
It seems to me that we ought to take cabs when we go south or east; and
even leave them somewhere near the neighbourhood we are going to."

"Friend Quincey is right!" said the Professor. "His head is what you
call in plane with the horizon. It is a difficult thing that we go to
do, and we do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may."

Mina took a growing interest in everything and I was rejoiced to see
that the exigency of affairs was helping her to forget for a time the
terrible experience of the night. She was very, very pale--almost
ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in
somewhat of prominence. I did not mention this last, lest it should give
her needless pain; but it made my blood run cold in my veins to think of
what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count had sucked her blood. As
yet there was no sign of the teeth growing sharper; but the time as yet
was short, and there was time for fear.

When we came to the discussion of the sequence of our efforts and of the
disposition of our forces, there were new sources of doubt. It was
finally agreed that before starting for Piccadilly we should destroy the
Count's lair close at hand. In case he should find it out too soon, we
should thus be still ahead of him in our work of destruction; and his
presence in his purely material shape, and at his weakest, might give us
some new clue.

As to the disposal of forces, it was suggested by the Professor that,
after our visit to Carfax, we should all enter the house in Piccadilly;
that the two doctors and I should remain there, whilst Lord Godalming
and Quincey found the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed them.
It was possible, if not likely, the Professor urged, that the Count
might appear in Piccadilly during the day, and that if so we might be
able to cope with him then and there. At any rate, we might be able to
follow him in force. To this plan I strenuously objected, and so far as
my going was concerned, for I said that I intended to stay and protect
Mina, I thought that my mind was made up on the subject; but Mina would
not listen to my objection. She said that there might be some law matter
in which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be
some clue which I could understand out of my experience in Transylvania;
and that, as it was, all the strength we could muster was required to
cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to give in, for Mina's
resolution was fixed; she said that it was the last hope for _her_ that
we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear.
Things have been as bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must
have in it some element of hope or comfort. Go, my husband! God can, if
He wishes it, guard me as well alone as with any one present." So I
started up crying out: "Then in God's name let us come at once, for we
are losing time. The Count may come to Piccadilly earlier than we
think."

"Not so!" said Van Helsing, holding up his hand.

"But why?" I asked.

"Do you forget," he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he
banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?"

Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us ever forget that
terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep her brave countenance; but
the pain overmastered her and she put her hands before her face, and
shuddered whilst she moaned. Van Helsing had not intended to recall her
frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her and her part in
the affair in his intellectual effort. When it struck him what he said,
he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to comfort her. "Oh,
Madam Mina," he said, "dear, dear Madam Mina, alas! that I of all who so
reverence you should have said anything so forgetful. These stupid old
lips of mine and this stupid old head do not deserve so; but you will
forget it, will you not?" He bent low beside her as he spoke; she took
his hand, and looking at him through her tears, said hoarsely:--

"No, I shall not forget, for it is well that I remember; and with it I
have so much in memory of you that is sweet, that I take it all
together. Now, you must all be going soon. Breakfast is ready, and we
must all eat that we may be strong."

Breakfast was a strange meal to us all. We tried to be cheerful and
encourage each other, and Mina was the brightest and most cheerful of
us. When it was over, Van Helsing stood up and said:--

"Now, my dear friends, we go forth to our terrible enterprise. Are we
all armed, as we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's
lair; armed against ghostly as well as carnal attack?" We all assured
him. "Then it is well. Now, Madam Mina, you are in any case _quite_ safe
here until the sunset; and before then we shall return--if---- We shall
return! But before we go let me see you armed against personal attack. I
have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing
of things of which we know, so that He may not enter. Now let me guard
yourself. On your forehead I touch this piece of Sacred Wafer in the
name of the Father, the Son, and----"

There was a fearful scream which almost froze our hearts to hear. As he
had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned
into the flesh as though it had been a piece of white-hot metal. My poor
darling's brain had told her the significance of the fact as quickly as
her nerves received the pain of it; and the two so overwhelmed her that
her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the
words to her thought came quickly; the echo of the scream had not ceased
to ring on the air when there came the reaction, and she sank on her
knees on the floor in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair
over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:--

"Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must
bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They
all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of helpless
grief, and putting my arms around held her tight. For a few minutes our
sorrowful hearts beat together, whilst the friends around us turned away
their eyes that ran tears silently. Then Van Helsing turned and said
gravely; so gravely that I could not help feeling that he was in some
way inspired, and was stating things outside himself:--

"It may be that you may have to bear that mark till God himself see fit,
as He most surely shall, on the Judgment Day, to redress all wrongs of
the earth and of His children that He has placed thereon. And oh, Madam
Mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that
red scar, the sign of God's knowledge of what has been, shall pass away,
and leave your forehead as pure as the heart we know. For so surely as
we live, that scar shall pass away when God sees right to lift the
burden that is hard upon us. Till then we bear our Cross, as His Son did
in obedience to His Will. It may be that we are chosen instruments of
His good pleasure, and that we ascend to His bidding as that other
through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and
fears, and all that makes the difference between God and man."

There was hope in his words, and comfort; and they made for resignation.
Mina and I both felt so, and simultaneously we each took one of the old
man's hands and bent over and kissed it. Then without a word we all
knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to each
other. We men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sorrow from the
head of her whom, each in his own way, we loved; and we prayed for help
and guidance in the terrible task which lay before us.

It was then time to start. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which
neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out.

To one thing I have made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be a
vampire in the end, then she shall not go into that unknown and terrible
land alone. I suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire meant
many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so
the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks.

We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as on
the first occasion. It was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic
surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any ground for such
fear as already we knew. Had not our minds been made up, and had there
not been terrible memories to spur us on, we could hardly have proceeded
with our task. We found no papers, or any sign of use in the house; and
in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had seen them last.
Dr. Van Helsing said to us solemnly as we stood before them:--

"And now, my friends, we have a duty here to do. We must sterilise this
earth, so sacred of holy memories, that he has brought from a far
distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has
been holy. Thus we defeat him with his own weapon, for we make it more
holy still. It was sanctified to such use of man, now we sanctify it to
God." As he spoke he took from his bag a screwdriver and a wrench, and
very soon the top of one of the cases was thrown open. The earth smelled
musty and close; but we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention
was concentrated on the Professor. Taking from his box a piece of the
Sacred Wafer he laid it reverently on the earth, and then shutting down
the lid began to screw it home, we aiding him as he worked.

One by one we treated in the same way each of the great boxes, and left
them as we had found them to all appearance; but in each was a portion
of the Host.

When we closed the door behind us, the Professor said solemnly:--

"So much is already done. If it may be that with all the others we can
be so successful, then the sunset of this evening may shine on Madam
Mina's forehead all white as ivory and with no stain!"

As we passed across the lawn on our way to the station to catch our
train we could see the front of the asylum. I looked eagerly, and in the
window of my own room saw Mina. I waved my hand to her, and nodded to
tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in
reply to show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her
hand in farewell. It was with a heavy heart that we sought the station
and just caught the train, which was steaming in as we reached the
platform.

I have written this in the train.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Piccadilly, 12:30 o'clock._--Just before we reached Fenchurch Street
Lord Godalming said to me:--

"Quincey and I will find a locksmith. You had better not come with us in
case there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances it
wouldn't seem so bad for us to break into an empty house. But you are a
solicitor and the Incorporated Law Society might tell you that you
should have known better." I demurred as to my not sharing any danger
even of odium, but he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention
if there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with
the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You had
better go with Jack and the Professor and stay in the Green Park,
somewhere in sight of the house; and when you see the door opened and
the smith has gone away, do you all come across. We shall be on the
lookout for you, and shall let you in."

"The advice is good!" said Van Helsing, so we said no more. Godalming
and Morris hurried off in a cab, we following in another. At the corner
of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into the Green
Park. My heart beat as I saw the house on which so much of our hope was
centred, looming up grim and silent in its deserted condition amongst
its more lively and spruce-looking neighbours. We sat down on a bench
within good view, and began to smoke cigars so as to attract as little
attention as possible. The minutes seemed to pass with leaden feet as we
waited for the coming of the others.

At length we saw a four-wheeler drive up. Out of it, in leisurely
fashion, got Lord Godalming and Morris; and down from the box descended
a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid
the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two
ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done.
The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the spikes
of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered
along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man kneeling down
placed his bag beside him. After searching through it, he took out a
selection of tools which he produced to lay beside him in orderly
fashion. Then he stood up, looked into the keyhole, blew into it, and
turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and
the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, he
began to probe the lock, as if feeling his way with it. After fumbling
about for a bit he tried a second, and then a third. All at once the
door opened under a slight push from him, and he and the two others
entered the hall. We sat still; my own cigar burnt furiously, but Van
Helsing's went cold altogether. We waited patiently as we saw the
workman come out and bring in his bag. Then he held the door partly
open, steadying it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to the lock.
This he finally handed to Lord Godalming, who took out his purse and
gave him something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, put on his
coat and departed; not a soul took the slightest notice of the whole
transaction.

When the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at
the door. It was immediately opened by Quincey Morris, beside whom stood
Lord Godalming lighting a cigar.

"The place smells so vilely," said the latter as we came in. It did
indeed smell vilely--like the old chapel at Carfax--and with our
previous experience it was plain to us that the Count had been using the
place pretty freely. We moved to explore the house, all keeping together
in case of attack; for we knew we had a strong and wily enemy to deal
with, and as yet we did not know whether the Count might not be in the
house. In the dining-room, which lay at the back of the hall, we found
eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the nine, which we sought!
Our work was not over, and would never be until we should have found the
missing box. First we opened the shutters of the window which looked out
across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable,
pointed to look like the front of a miniature house. There were no
windows in it, so we were not afraid of being over-looked. We did not
lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had
brought with us we opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had
treated those others in the old chapel. It was evident to us that the
Count was not at present in the house, and we proceeded to search for
any of his effects.

After a cursory glance at the rest of the rooms, from basement to attic,
we came to the conclusion that the dining-room contained any effects
which might belong to the Count; and so we proceeded to minutely examine
them. They lay in a sort of orderly disorder on the great dining-room
table. There were title deeds of the Piccadilly house in a great bundle;
deeds of the purchase of the houses at Mile End and Bermondsey;
note-paper, envelopes, and pens and ink. All were covered up in thin
wrapping paper to keep them from the dust. There were also a clothes
brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin--the latter containing
dirty water which was reddened as if with blood. Last of all was a
little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to
the other houses. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming
and Quincey Morris taking accurate notes of the various addresses of the
houses in the East and the South, took with them the keys in a great
bunch, and set out to destroy the boxes in these places. The rest of us
are, with what patience we can, waiting their return--or the coming of
the Count.




CHAPTER XXIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_3 October._--The time seemed terrible long whilst we were waiting for
the coming of Godalming and Quincey Morris. The Professor tried to keep
our minds active by using them all the time. I could see his beneficent
purpose, by the side glances which he threw from time to time at Harker.
The poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to see.
Last night he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful
face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a drawn,
haggard old man, whose white hair matches well with the hollow burning
eyes and grief-written lines of his face. His energy is still intact; in
fact, he is like a living flame. This may yet be his salvation, for, if
all go well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then,
in a kind of way, wake again to the realities of life. Poor fellow, I
thought my own trouble was bad enough, but his----! The Professor knows
this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he
has been saying was, under the circumstances, of absorbing interest. So
well as I can remember, here it is:--

"I have studied, over and over again since they came into my hands, all
the papers relating to this monster; and the more I have studied, the
greater seems the necessity to utterly stamp him out. All through there
are signs of his advance; not only of his power, but of his knowledge of
it. As I learned from the researches of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth,
he was in life a most wonderful man. Soldier, statesman, and
alchemist--which latter was the highest development of the
science-knowledge of his time. He had a mighty brain, a learning beyond
compare, and a heart that knew no fear and no remorse. He dared even to
attend the Scholomance, and there was no branch of knowledge of his time
that he did not essay. Well, in him the brain powers survived the
physical death; though it would seem that memory was not all complete.
In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is
growing, and some things that were childish at the first are now of
man's stature. He is experimenting, and doing it well; and if it had not
been that we have crossed his path he would be yet--he may be yet if we
fail--the father or furtherer of a new order of beings, whose road must
lead through Death, not Life."

Harker groaned and said, "And this is all arrayed against my darling!
But how is he experimenting? The knowledge may help us to defeat him!"

"He has all along, since his coming, been trying his power, slowly but
surely; that big child-brain of his is working. Well for us, it is, as
yet, a child-brain; for had he dared, at the first, to attempt certain
things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means
to succeed, and a man who has centuries before him can afford to wait
and to go slow. _Festina lente_ may well be his motto."

"I fail to understand," said Harker wearily. "Oh, do be more plain to
me! Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain."

The Professor laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:--

"Ah, my child, I will be plain. Do you not see how, of late, this
monster has been creeping into knowledge experimentally. How he has been
making use of the zoöphagous patient to effect his entry into friend
John's home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come when
and how he will, must at the first make entry only when asked thereto by
an inmate. But these are not his most important experiments. Do we not
see how at the first all these so great boxes were moved by others. He
knew not then but that must be so. But all the time that so great
child-brain of his was growing, and he began to consider whether he
might not himself move the box. So he began to help; and then, when he
found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so he
progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where
they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. So
that he only use them in the night, or at such time as he can change his
form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his
hiding-place! But, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him
just too late! Already all of his lairs but one be sterilise as for him;
and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have no place where he
can move and hide. I delayed this morning that so we might be sure. Is
there not more at stake for us than for him? Then why we not be even
more careful than him? By my clock it is one hour and already, if all be
well, friend Arthur and Quincey are on their way to us. To-day is our
day, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! there are
five of us when those absent ones return."

Whilst he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door, the
double postman's knock of the telegraph boy. We all moved out to the
hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, holding up his hand to us to
keep silence, stepped to the door and opened it. The boy handed in a
despatch. The Professor closed the door again, and, after looking at the
direction, opened it and read aloud.

"Look out for D. He has just now, 12:45, come from Carfax hurriedly and
hastened towards the South. He seems to be going the round and may want
to see you: Mina."

There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:--

"Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to him
quickly and said:--

"God will act in His own way and time. Do not fear, and do not rejoice
as yet; for what we wish for at the moment may be our undoings."

"I care for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this
brute from the face of creation. I would sell my soul to do it!"

"Oh, hush, hush, my child!" said Van Helsing. "God does not purchase
souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not keep
faith. But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your
devotion to that dear Madam Mina. Think you, how her pain would be
doubled, did she but hear your wild words. Do not fear any of us, we are
all devoted to this cause, and to-day shall see the end. The time is
coming for action; to-day this Vampire is limit to the powers of man,
and till sunset he may not change. It will take him time to arrive
here--see, it is twenty minutes past one--and there are yet some times
before he can hither come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for
is that my Lord Arthur and Quincey arrive first."

About half an hour after we had received Mrs. Harker's telegram, there
came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall door. It was just an ordinary
knock, such as is given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but it made
the Professor's heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other, and
together moved out into the hall; we each held ready to use our various
armaments--the spiritual in the left hand, the mortal in the right. Van
Helsing pulled back the latch, and, holding the door half open, stood
back, having both hands ready for action. The gladness of our hearts
must have shown upon our faces when on the step, close to the door, we
saw Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris. They came quickly in and closed
the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the
hall:--

"It is all right. We found both places; six boxes in each and we
destroyed them all!"

"Destroyed?" asked the Professor.

"For him!" We were silent for a minute, and then Quincey said:--

"There's nothing to do but to wait here. If, however, he doesn't turn up
by five o'clock, we must start off; for it won't do to leave Mrs. Harker
alone after sunset."

"He will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, who had been
consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went
south from Carfax, that means he went to cross the river, and he could
only do so at slack of tide, which should be something before one
o'clock. That he went south has a meaning for us. He is as yet only
suspicious; and he went from Carfax first to the place where he would
suspect interference least. You must have been at Bermondsey only a
short time before him. That he is not here already shows that he went to
Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would then have to be
carried over the river in some way. Believe me, my friends, we shall not
have long to wait now. We should have ready some plan of attack, so that
we may throw away no chance. Hush, there is no time now. Have all your
arms! Be ready!" He held up a warning hand as he spoke, for we all could
hear a key softly inserted in the lock of the hall door.

I could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way in which a
dominant spirit asserted itself. In all our hunting parties and
adventures in different parts of the world, Quincey Morris had always
been the one to arrange the plan of action, and Arthur and I had been
accustomed to obey him implicitly. Now, the old habit seemed to be
renewed instinctively. With a swift glance around the room, he at once
laid out our plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a
gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were
just behind the door, so that when it was opened the Professor could
guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door.
Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight ready to
move in front of the window. We waited in a suspense that made the
seconds pass with nightmare slowness. The slow, careful steps came along
the hall; the Count was evidently prepared for some surprise--at least
he feared it.

Suddenly with a single bound he leaped into the room, winning a way past
us before any of us could raise a hand to stay him. There was something
so panther-like in the movement--something so unhuman, that it seemed
to sober us all from the shock of his coming. The first to act was
Harker, who, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door
leading into the room in the front of the house. As the Count saw us, a
horrible sort of snarl passed over his face, showing the eye-teeth long
and pointed; but the evil smile as quickly passed into a cold stare of
lion-like disdain. His expression again changed as, with a single
impulse, we all advanced upon him. It was a pity that we had not some
better organised plan of attack, for even at the moment I wondered what
we were to do. I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would
avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had
ready his great Kukri knife and made a fierce and sudden cut at him. The
blow was a powerful one; only the diabolical quickness of the Count's
leap back saved him. A second less and the trenchant blade had shorne
through his heart. As it was, the point just cut the cloth of his coat,
making a wide gap whence a bundle of bank-notes and a stream of gold
fell out. The expression of the Count's face was so hellish, that for a
moment I feared for Harker, though I saw him throw the terrible knife
aloft again for another stroke. Instinctively I moved forward with a
protective impulse, holding the Crucifix and Wafer in my left hand. I
felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was without surprise that I
saw the monster cower back before a similar movement made spontaneously
by each one of us. It would be impossible to describe the expression of
hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over
the Count's face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast
of his burning eyes, and the red scar on the forehead showed on the
pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous
dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping
a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw
himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass,
he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of the
shivering glass I could hear the "ting" of the gold, as some of the
sovereigns fell on the flagging.

We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up
the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door.
There he turned and spoke to us:--

"You think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a row, like
sheep in a butcher's. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think
you have left me without a place to rest; but I have more. My revenge is
just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time is on my side. Your
girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and
others shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding and to be my
jackals when I want to feed. Bah!" With a contemptuous sneer, he passed
quickly through the door, and we heard the rusty bolt creak as he
fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us
to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following
him through the stable, we moved toward the hall.

"We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he
fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His
very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You
follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For
me, I make sure that nothing here may be of use to him, if so that he
return." As he spoke he put the money remaining into his pocket; took
the title-deeds in the bundle as Harker had left them, and swept the
remaining things into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with
a match.

Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the yard, and Harker had
lowered himself from the window to follow the Count. He had, however,
bolted the stable door; and by the time they had forced it open there
was no sign of him. Van Helsing and I tried to make inquiry at the back
of the house; but the mews was deserted and no one had seen him depart.

It was now late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far off. We had to
recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the
Professor when he said:--

"Let us go back to Madam Mina--poor, poor dear Madam Mina. All we can do
just now is done; and we can there, at least, protect her. But we need
not despair. There is but one more earth-box, and we must try to find
it; when that is done all may yet be well." I could see that he spoke as
bravely as he could to comfort Harker. The poor fellow was quite broken
down; now and again he gave a low groan which he could not suppress--he
was thinking of his wife.

With sad hearts we came back to my house, where we found Mrs. Harker
waiting us, with an appearance of cheerfulness which did honour to her
bravery and unselfishness. When she saw our faces, her own became as
pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were closed as if she were
in secret prayer; and then she said cheerfully:--

"I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke,
she took her husband's grey head in her hands and kissed it--"Lay your
poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect
us if He so will it in His good intent." The poor fellow groaned. There
was no place for words in his sublime misery.

We had a sort of perfunctory supper together, and I think it cheered us
all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry
people--for none of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or the sense
of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all less
miserable, and saw the morrow as not altogether without hope. True to
our promise, we told Mrs. Harker everything which had passed; and
although she grew snowy white at times when danger had seemed to
threaten her husband, and red at others when his devotion to her was
manifested, she listened bravely and with calmness. When we came to the
part where Harker had rushed at the Count so recklessly, she clung to
her husband's arm, and held it tight as though her clinging could
protect him from any harm that might come. She said nothing, however,
till the narration was all done, and matters had been brought right up
to the present time. Then without letting go her husband's hand she
stood up amongst us and spoke. Oh, that I could give any idea of the
scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the radiant beauty
of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead, of which
she was conscious, and which we saw with grinding of our
teeth--remembering whence and how it came; her loving kindness against
our grim hate; her tender faith against all our fears and doubting; and
we, knowing that so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and
purity and faith, was outcast from God.

"Jonathan," she said, and the word sounded like music on her lips it was
so full of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my true,
true friends, I want you to bear something in mind through all this
dreadful time. I know that you must fight--that you must destroy even as
you destroyed the false Lucy so that the true Lucy might live hereafter;
but it is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought all this
misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what will be his joy when
he, too, is destroyed in his worser part that his better part may have
spiritual immortality. You must be pitiful to him, too, though it may
not hold your hands from his destruction."

As she spoke I could see her husband's face darken and draw together, as
though the passion in him were shrivelling his being to its core.
Instinctively the clasp on his wife's hand grew closer, till his
knuckles looked white. She did not flinch from the pain which I knew she
must have suffered, but looked at him with eyes that were more appealing
than ever. As she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, almost tearing
his hand from hers as he spoke:--

"May God give him into my hand just for long enough to destroy that
earthly life of him which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could send
his soul for ever and ever to burning hell I would do it!"

"Oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of the good God. Don't say such things,
Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just
think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of it--that
... perhaps ... some day ... I, too, may need such pity; and that some
other like you--and with equal cause for anger--may deny it to me! Oh,
my husband! my husband, indeed I would have spared you such a thought
had there been another way; but I pray that God may not have treasured
your wild words, except as the heart-broken wail of a very loving and
sorely stricken man. Oh, God, let these poor white hairs go in evidence
of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom
so many sorrows have come."

We men were all in tears now. There was no resisting them, and we wept
openly. She wept, too, to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed.
Her husband flung himself on his knees beside her, and putting his arms
round her, hid his face in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned
to us and we stole out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone
with their God.

Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming
of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might rest in peace.
She tried to school herself to the belief, and, manifestly for her
husband's sake, tried to seem content. It was a brave struggle; and was,
I think and believe, not without its reward. Van Helsing had placed at
hand a bell which either of them was to sound in case of any emergency.
When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should
sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the safety of the
poor stricken lady. The first watch falls to Quincey, so the rest of us
shall be off to bed as soon as we can. Godalming has already turned in,
for his is the second watch. Now that my work is done I, too, shall go
to bed.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_3-4 October, close to midnight._--I thought yesterday would never end.
There was over me a yearning for sleep, in some sort of blind belief
that to wake would be to find things changed, and that any change must
now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step
was to be, but we could arrive at no result. All we knew was that one
earth-box remained, and that the Count alone knew where it was. If he
chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; and in the
meantime!--the thought is too horrible, I dare not think of it even now.
This I know: that if ever there was a woman who was all perfection, that
one is my poor wronged darling. I love her a thousand times more for her
sweet pity of last night, a pity that made my own hate of the monster
seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to be the poorer
by the loss of such a creature. This is hope to me. We are all drifting
reefwards now, and faith is our only anchor. Thank God! Mina is
sleeping, and sleeping without dreams. I fear what her dreams might be
like, with such terrible memories to ground them in. She has not been so
calm, within my seeing, since the sunset. Then, for a while, there came
over her face a repose which was like spring after the blasts of March.
I thought at the time that it was the softness of the red sunset on her
face, but somehow now I think it has a deeper meaning. I am not sleepy
myself, though I am weary--weary to death. However, I must try to sleep;
for there is to-morrow to think of, and there is no rest for me
until....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I must have fallen asleep, for I was awaked by Mina, who was
sitting up in bed, with a startled look on her face. I could see easily,
for we did not leave the room in darkness; she had placed a warning hand
over my mouth, and now she whispered in my ear:--

"Hush! there is someone in the corridor!" I got up softly, and crossing
the room, gently opened the door.

Just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris, wide awake. He
raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me:--

"Hush! go back to bed; it is all right. One of us will be here all
night. We don't mean to take any chances!"

His look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came back and told Mina.
She sighed and positively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale
face as she put her arms round me and said softly:--

"Oh, thank God for good brave men!" With a sigh she sank back again to
sleep. I write this now as I am not sleepy, though I must try again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 October, morning._--Once again during the night I was wakened by
Mina. This time we had all had a good sleep, for the grey of the coming
dawn was making the windows into sharp oblongs, and the gas flame was
like a speck rather than a disc of light. She said to me hurriedly:--

"Go, call the Professor. I want to see him at once."

"Why?" I asked.

"I have an idea. I suppose it must have come in the night, and matured
without my knowing it. He must hypnotise me before the dawn, and then I
shall be able to speak. Go quick, dearest; the time is getting close." I
went to the door. Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing
me, he sprang to his feet.

"Is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm.

"No," I replied; "but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing at once."

"I will go," he said, and hurried into the Professor's room.

In two or three minutes later Van Helsing was in the room in his
dressing-gown, and Mr. Morris and Lord Godalming were with Dr. Seward at
the door asking questions. When the Professor saw Mina a smile--a
positive smile ousted the anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as he
said:--

"Oh, my dear Madam Mina, this is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan,
we have got our dear Madam Mina, as of old, back to us to-day!" Then
turning to her, he said, cheerfully: "And what am I do for you? For at
this hour you do not want me for nothings."

"I want you to hypnotise me!" she said. "Do it before the dawn, for I
feel that then I can speak, and speak freely. Be quick, for the time is
short!" Without a word he motioned her to sit up in bed.

Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of her,
from over the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina
gazed at him fixedly for a few minutes, during which my own heart beat
like a trip hammer, for I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually
her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heaving of
her bosom could one know that she was alive. The Professor made a few
more passes and then stopped, and I could see that his forehead was
covered with great beads of perspiration. Mina opened her eyes; but she
did not seem the same woman. There was a far-away look in her eyes, and
her voice had a sad dreaminess which was new to me. Raising his hand to
impose silence, the Professor motioned to me to bring the others in.
They came on tip-toe, closing the door behind them, and stood at the
foot of the bed, looking on. Mina appeared not to see them. The
stillness was broken by Van Helsing's voice speaking in a low level tone
which would not break the current of her thoughts:--

"Where are you?" The answer came in a neutral way:--

"I do not know. Sleep has no place it can call its own." For several
minutes there was silence. Mina sat rigid, and the Professor stood
staring at her fixedly; the rest of us hardly dared to breathe. The room
was growing lighter; without taking his eyes from Mina's face, Dr. Van
Helsing motioned me to pull up the blind. I did so, and the day seemed
just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to diffuse
itself through the room. On the instant the Professor spoke again:--

"Where are you now?" The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it
were as though she were interpreting something. I have heard her use the
same tone when reading her shorthand notes.

"I do not know. It is all strange to me!"

"What do you see?"

"I can see nothing; it is all dark."

"What do you hear?" I could detect the strain in the Professor's patient
voice.

"The lapping of water. It is gurgling by, and little waves leap. I can
hear them on the outside."

"Then you are on a ship?" We all looked at each other, trying to glean
something each from the other. We were afraid to think. The answer came
quick:--

"Oh, yes!"

"What else do you hear?"

"The sound of men stamping overhead as they run about. There is the
creaking of a chain, and the loud tinkle as the check of the capstan
falls into the rachet."

"What are you doing?"

"I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!" The voice faded away into
a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the open eyes closed again.

By this time the sun had risen, and we were all in the full light of
day. Dr. Van Helsing placed his hands on Mina's shoulders, and laid her
head down softly on her pillow. She lay like a sleeping child for a few
moments, and then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to see
us all around her. "Have I been talking in my sleep?" was all she said.
She seemed, however, to know the situation without telling, though she
was eager to know what she had told. The Professor repeated the
conversation, and she said:--

"Then there is not a moment to lose: it may not be yet too late!" Mr.
Morris and Lord Godalming started for the door but the Professor's calm
voice called them back:--

"Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor
whilst she spoke. There are many ships weighing anchor at the moment in
your so great Port of London. Which of them is it that you seek? God be
thanked that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we
know not. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of men,
since when we can look back we see what we might have seen looking
forward if we had been able to see what we might have seen! Alas, but
that sentence is a puddle; is it not? We can know now what was in the
Count's mind, when he seize that money, though Jonathan's so fierce
knife put him in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear
me, ESCAPE! He saw that with but one earth-box left, and a pack of men
following like dogs after a fox, this London was no place for him. He
have take his last earth-box on board a ship, and he leave the land. He
think to escape, but no! we follow him. Tally Ho! as friend Arthur would
say when he put on his red frock! Our old fox is wily; oh! so wily, and
we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think his mind in a
little while. In meantime we may rest and in peace, for there are waters
between us which he do not want to pass, and which he could not if he
would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or
slack tide. See, and the sun is just rose, and all day to sunset is to
us. Let us take bath, and dress, and have breakfast which we all need,
and which we can eat comfortably since he be not in the same land with
us." Mina looked at him appealingly as she asked:--

"But why need we seek him further, when he is gone away from us?" He
took her hand and patted it as he replied:--

"Ask me nothings as yet. When we have breakfast, then I answer all
questions." He would say no more, and we separated to dress.

After breakfast Mina repeated her question. He looked at her gravely for
a minute and then said sorrowfully:--

"Because my dear, dear Madam Mina, now more than ever must we find him
even if we have to follow him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as
she asked faintly:--

"Why?"

"Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are
but mortal woman. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark
upon your throat."

I was just in time to catch her as she fell forward in a faint.




CHAPTER XXIV

DR. SEWARD'S PHONOGRAPH DIARY, SPOKEN BY VAN HELSING


This to Jonathan Harker.

You are to stay with your dear Madam Mina. We shall go to make our
search--if I can call it so, for it is not search but knowing, and we
seek confirmation only. But do you stay and take care of her to-day.
This is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him
here. Let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already,
for I have tell them. He, our enemy, have gone away; he have gone back
to his Castle in Transylvania. I know it so well, as if a great hand of
fire wrote it on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and
that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the
money; for this he hurry at the last, lest we catch him before the sun
go down. It was his last hope, save that he might hide in the tomb that
he think poor Miss Lucy, being as he thought like him, keep open to him.
But there was not of time. When that fail he make straight for his last
resource--his last earth-work I might say did I wish _double entente_.
He is clever, oh, so clever! he know that his game here was finish; and
so he decide he go back home. He find ship going by the route he came,
and he go in it. We go off now to find what ship, and whither bound;
when we have discover that, we come back and tell you all. Then we will
comfort you and poor dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be hope
when you think it over: that all is not lost. This very creature that we
pursue, he take hundreds of years to get so far as London; and yet in
one day, when we know of the disposal of him we drive him out. He is
finite, though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we do.
But we are strong, each in our purpose; and we are all more strong
together. Take heart afresh, dear husband of Madam Mina. This battle is
but begun, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high
to watch over His children. Therefore be of much comfort till we return.

VAN HELSING.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the
phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the
certainty that the Count is out of the country has given her comfort;
and comfort is strength to her. For my own part, now that his horrible
danger is not face to face with us, it seems almost impossible to
believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem
like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright
sunlight----

Alas! how can I disbelieve! In the midst of my thought my eye fell on
the red scar on my poor darling's white forehead. Whilst that lasts,
there can be no disbelief. And afterwards the very memory of it will
keep faith crystal clear. Mina and I fear to be idle, so we have been
over all the diaries again and again. Somehow, although the reality
seems greater each time, the pain and the fear seem less. There is
something of a guiding purpose manifest throughout, which is comforting.
Mina says that perhaps we are the instruments of ultimate good. It may
be! I shall try to think as she does. We have never spoken to each other
yet of the future. It is better to wait till we see the Professor and
the others after their investigations.

The day is running by more quickly than I ever thought a day could run
for me again. It is now three o'clock.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_5 October, 5 p. m._--Our meeting for report. Present: Professor Van
Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan
Harker, Mina Harker.

Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day to
discover on what boat and whither bound Count Dracula made his escape:--

"As I knew that he wanted to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that
he must go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the Black Sea, since
by that way he come. It was a dreary blank that was before us. _Omne
ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we start to find what
ships leave for the Black Sea last night. He was in sailing ship, since
Madam Mina tell of sails being set. These not so important as to go in
your list of the shipping in the _Times_, and so we go, by suggestion of
Lord Godalming, to your Lloyd's, where are note of all ships that sail,
however so small. There we find that only one Black-Sea-bound ship go
out with the tide. She is the _Czarina Catherine_, and she sail from
Doolittle's Wharf for Varna, and thence on to other parts and up the
Danube. 'Soh!' said I, 'this is the ship whereon is the Count.' So off
we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we find a man in an office of wood
so small that the man look bigger than the office. From him we inquire
of the goings of the _Czarina Catherine_. He swear much, and he red face
and loud of voice, but he good fellow all the same; and when Quincey
give him something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and
put it in a so small bag which he have hid deep in his clothing, he
still better fellow and humble servant to us. He come with us, and ask
many men who are rough and hot; these be better fellows too when they
have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of
others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but
nevertheless they tell us all things which we want to know.

"They make known to us among them, how last afternoon at about five
o'clock comes a man so hurry. A tall man, thin and pale, with high nose
and teeth so white, and eyes that seem to be burning. That he be all in
black, except that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or the
time. That he scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to what ship
sails for the Black Sea and for where. Some took him to the office and
then to the ship, where he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of
gang-plank, and ask that the captain come to him. The captain come, when
told that he will be pay well; and though he swear much at the first he
agree to term. Then the thin man go and some one tell him where horse
and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself
driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it
take several to put it on truck for the ship. He give much talk to
captain as to how and where his box is to be place; but the captain like
it not and swear at him in many tongues, and tell him that if he like he
can come and see where it shall be. But he say 'no'; that he come not
yet, for that he have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that he
had better be quick--with blood--for that his ship will leave the
place--of blood--before the turn of the tide--with blood. Then the thin
man smile and say that of course he must go when he think fit; but he
will be surprise if he go quite so soon. The captain swear again,
polyglot, and the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he
will so far intrude on his kindness as to come aboard before the
sailing. Final the captain, more red than ever, and in more tongues tell
him that he doesn't want no Frenchmen--with bloom upon them and also
with blood--in his ship--with blood on her also. And so, after asking
where there might be close at hand a ship where he might purchase ship
forms, he departed.

"No one knew where he went 'or bloomin' well cared,' as they said, for
they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon
became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ would not sail as
was expected. A thin mist began to creep up from the river, and it grew,
and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and all around her.
The captain swore polyglot--very polyglot--polyglot with bloom and
blood; but he could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began to
fear that he would lose the tide altogether. He was in no friendly mood,
when just at full tide, the thin man came up the gang-plank again and
asked to see where his box had been stowed. Then the captain replied
that he wished that he and his box--old and with much bloom and
blood--were in hell. But the thin man did not be offend, and went down
with the mate and saw where it was place, and came up and stood awhile
on deck in fog. He must have come off by himself, for none notice him.
Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and
all was clear again. My friends of the thirst and the language that was
of bloom and blood laughed, as they told how the captain's swears
exceeded even his usual polyglot, and was more than ever full of
picturesque, when on questioning other mariners who were on movement up
and down on the river that hour, he found that few of them had seen any
of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship
went out on the ebb tide; and was doubtless by morning far down the
river mouth. She was by then, when they told us, well out to sea.

"And so, my dear Madam Mina, it is that we have to rest for a time, for
our enemy is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the
Danube mouth. To sail a ship takes time, go she never so quick; and when
we start we go on land more quick, and we meet him there. Our best hope
is to come on him when in the box between sunrise and sunset; for then
he can make no struggle, and we may deal with him as we should. There
are days for us, in which we can make ready our plan. We know all about
where he go; for we have seen the owner of the ship, who have shown us
invoices and all papers that can be. The box we seek is to be landed in
Varna, and to be given to an agent, one Ristics who will there present
his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part.
When he ask if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and
have inquiry made at Varna, we say 'no'; for what is to be done is not
for police or of the customs. It must be done by us alone and in our own
way."

When Dr. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him if he were certain
that the Count had remained on board the ship. He replied: "We have the
best proof of that: your own evidence, when in the hypnotic trance this
morning." I asked him again if it were really necessary that they should
pursue the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and I know that
he would surely go if the others went. He answered in growing passion,
at first quietly. As he went on, however, he grew more angry and more
forceful, till in the end we could not but see wherein was at least some
of that personal dominance which made him so long a master amongst
men:--

"Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first,
and then for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm
already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the short
time when as yet he was only as a body groping his so small measure in
darkness and not knowing. All this have I told these others; you, my
dear Madam Mina, will learn it in the phonograph of my friend John, or
in that of your husband. I have told them how the measure of leaving his
own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a new land where life
of man teems till they are like the multitude of standing corn, was the
work of centuries. Were another of the Un-Dead, like him, to try to do
what he has done, perhaps not all the centuries of the world that have
been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of
nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in
some wondrous way. The very place, where he have been alive, Un-Dead for
all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical
world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither.
There have been volcanoes, some of whose openings still send out waters
of strange properties, and gases that kill or make to vivify. Doubtless,
there is something magnetic or electric in some of these combinations of
occult forces which work for physical life in strange way; and in
himself were from the first some great qualities. In a hard and warlike
time he was celebrate that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain,
more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in
strange way found their utmost; and as his body keep strong and grow and
thrive, so his brain grow too. All this without that diabolic aid which
is surely to him; for it have to yield to the powers that come from,
and are, symbolic of good. And now this is what he is to us. He have
infect you--oh, forgive me, my dear, that I must say such; but it is for
good of you that I speak. He infect you in such wise, that even if he do
no more, you have only to live--to live in your own old, sweet way; and
so in time, death, which is of man's common lot and with God's sanction,
shall make you like to him. This must not be! We have sworn together
that it must not. Thus are we ministers of God's own wish: that the
world, and men for whom His Son die, will not be given over to monsters,
whose very existence would defame Him. He have allowed us to redeem one
soul already, and we go out as the old knights of the Cross to redeem
more. Like them we shall travel towards the sunrise; and like them, if
we fall, we fall in good cause." He paused and I said:--

"But will not the Count take his rebuff wisely? Since he has been driven
from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from
which he has been hunted?"

"Aha!" he said, "your simile of the tiger good, for me, and I shall
adopt him. Your man-eater, as they of India call the tiger who has once
tasted blood of the human, care no more for the other prey, but prowl
unceasing till he get him. This that we hunt from our village is a
tiger, too, a man-eater, and he never cease to prowl. Nay, in himself he
is not one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he go
over the Turkey frontier and attack his enemy on his own ground; he be
beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, and again.
Look at his persistence and endurance. With the child-brain that was to
him he have long since conceive the idea of coming to a great city. What
does he do? He find out the place of all the world most of promise for
him. Then he deliberately set himself down to prepare for the task. He
find in patience just how is his strength, and what are his powers. He
study new tongues. He learn new social life; new environment of old
ways, the politic, the law, the finance, the science, the habit of a new
land and a new people who have come to be since he was. His glimpse that
he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it help
him to grow as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at
the first in his surmises. He have done this alone; all alone! from a
ruin tomb in a forgotten land. What more may he not do when the greater
world of thought is open to him. He that can smile at death, as we know
him; who can flourish in the midst of diseases that kill off whole
peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from God, and not the Devil,
what a force for good might he not be in this old world of ours. But we
are pledged to set the world free. Our toil must be in silence, and our
efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not
even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest
strength. It would be at once his sheath and his armour, and his weapons
to destroy us, his enemies, who are willing to peril even our own souls
for the safety of one we love--for the good of mankind, and for the
honour and glory of God."

After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing
be definitely settled; that we should all sleep on the facts, and try to
think out the proper conclusions. To-morrow, at breakfast, we are to
meet again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we
shall decide on some definite cause of action.

       *       *       *       *       *

I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It is as if some haunting
presence were removed from me. Perhaps ...

My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight in the
mirror of the red mark upon my forehead; and I knew that I was still
unclean.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_5 October._--We all rose early, and I think that sleep did much for
each and all of us. When we met at early breakfast there was more
general cheerfulness than any of us had ever expected to experience
again.

It is really wonderful how much resilience there is in human nature. Let
any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way--even by
death--and we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment. More
than once as we sat around the table, my eyes opened in wonder whether
the whole of the past days had not been a dream. It was only when I
caught sight of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was
brought back to reality. Even now, when I am gravely revolving the
matter, it is almost impossible to realise that the cause of all our
trouble is still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of her
trouble for whole spells; it is only now and again, when something
recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible scar. We are to
meet here in my study in half an hour and decide on our course of
action. I see only one immediate difficulty, I know it by instinct
rather than reason: we shall all have to speak frankly; and yet I fear
that in some mysterious way poor Mrs. Harker's tongue is tied. I _know_
that she forms conclusions of her own, and from all that has been I can
guess how brilliant and how true they must be; but she will not, or
cannot, give them utterance. I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, and
he and I are to talk it over when we are alone. I suppose it is some of
that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. The
Count had his own purposes when he gave her what Van Helsing called "the
Vampire's baptism of blood." Well, there may be a poison that distils
itself out of good things; in an age when the existence of ptomaines is
a mystery we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if my
instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker's silences, then there is a
terrible difficulty--an unknown danger--in the work before us. The same
power that compels her silence may compel her speech. I dare not think
further; for so I should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman!

Van Helsing is coming to my study a little before the others. I shall
try to open the subject with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--When the Professor came in, we talked over the state of
things. I could see that he had something on his mind which he wanted to
say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching the subject. After beating
about the bush a little, he said suddenly:--

"Friend John, there is something that you and I must talk of alone, just
at the first at any rate. Later, we may have to take the others into our
confidence"; then he stopped, so I waited; he went on:--

"Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina is changing." A cold shiver ran
through me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. Van Helsing
continued:--

"With the sad experience of Miss Lucy, we must this time be warned
before things go too far. Our task is now in reality more difficult than
ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst importance. I
can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in her face. It is now
but very, very slight; but it is to be seen if we have eyes to notice
without to prejudge. Her teeth are some sharper, and at times her eyes
are more hard. But these are not all, there is to her the silence now
often; as so it was with Miss Lucy. She did not speak, even when she
wrote that which she wished to be known later. Now my fear is this. If
it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and
hear, is it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who
have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he
will, compel her mind to disclose to him that which she know?" I nodded
acquiescence; he went on:--

"Then, what we must do is to prevent this; we must keep her ignorant of
our intent, and so she cannot tell what she know not. This is a painful
task! Oh, so painful that it heart-break me to think of; but it must be.
When to-day we meet, I must tell her that for reason which we will not
to speak she must not more be of our council, but be simply guarded by
us." He wiped his forehead, which had broken out in profuse perspiration
at the thought of the pain which he might have to inflict upon the poor
soul already so tortured. I knew that it would be some sort of comfort
to him if I told him that I also had come to the same conclusion; for at
any rate it would take away the pain of doubt. I told him, and the
effect was as I expected.

It is now close to the time of our general gathering. Van Helsing has
gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I
really believe his purpose is to be able to pray alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--At the very outset of our meeting a great personal relief was
experienced by both Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had sent a
message by her husband to say that she would not join us at present, as
she thought it better that we should be free to discuss our movements
without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I looked at each
other for an instant, and somehow we both seemed relieved. For my own
part, I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was
much pain as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we
agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to
preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have been able to
confer alone again. We went at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van
Helsing roughly put the facts before us first:--

"The _Czarina Catherine_ left the Thames yesterday morning. It will take
her at the quickest speed she has ever made at least three weeks to
reach Varna; but we can travel overland to the same place in three days.
Now, if we allow for two days less for the ship's voyage, owing to such
weather influences as we know that the Count can bring to bear; and if
we allow a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us,
then we have a margin of nearly two weeks. Thus, in order to be quite
safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. Then we shall at any rate
be in Varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to make such
preparations as may be necessary. Of course we shall all go armed--armed
against evil things, spiritual as well as physical." Here Quincey Morris
added:--

"I understand that the Count comes from a wolf country, and it may be
that he shall get there before us. I propose that we add Winchesters to
our armament. I have a kind of belief in a Winchester when there is any
trouble of that sort around. Do you remember, Art, when we had the pack
after us at Tobolsk? What wouldn't we have given then for a repeater
apiece!"

"Good!" said Van Helsing, "Winchesters it shall be. Quincey's head is
level at all times, but most so when there is to hunt, metaphor be more
dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime we
can do nothing here; and as I think that Varna is not familiar to any of
us, why not go there more soon? It is as long to wait here as there.
To-night and to-morrow we can get ready, and then, if all be well, we
four can set out on our journey."

"We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to another of
us.

"Of course!" answered the Professor quickly, "you must remain to take
care of your so sweet wife!" Harker was silent for awhile and then said
in a hollow voice:--

"Let us talk of that part of it in the morning. I want to consult with
Mina." I thought that now was the time for Van Helsing to warn him not
to disclose our plans to her; but he took no notice. I looked at him
significantly and coughed. For answer he put his finger on his lips and
turned away.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_5 October, afternoon._--For some time after our meeting this morning I
could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of
wonder which allows no room for active thought. Mina's determination not
to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I could not
argue the matter with her, I could only guess. I am as far as ever from
a solution now. The way the others received it, too, puzzled me; the
last time we talked of the subject we agreed that there was to be no
more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly
and sweetly like a little child. Her lips are curved and her face beams
with happiness. Thank God, there are such moments still for her.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--How strange it all is. I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and
came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I shall ever be. As the
evening drew on, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking
lower, the silence of the room grew more and more solemn to me. All at
once Mina opened her eyes, and looking at me tenderly, said:--

"Jonathan, I want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A
promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be
broken though I should go down on my knees and implore you with bitter
tears. Quick, you must make it to me at once."

"Mina," I said, "a promise like that, I cannot make at once. I may have
no right to make it."

"But, dear one," she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes
were like pole stars, "it is I who wish it; and it is not for myself.
You can ask Dr. Van Helsing if I am not right; if he disagrees you may
do as you will. Nay, more, if you all agree, later, you are absolved
from the promise."

"I promise!" I said, and for a moment she looked supremely happy; though
to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her forehead.
She said:--

"Promise me that you will not tell me anything of the plans formed for
the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or
implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she
solemnly pointed to the scar. I saw that she was in earnest, and said
solemnly:--

"I promise!" and as I said it I felt that from that instant a door had
been shut between us.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening.
So much so that all the rest seemed to take courage, as if infected
somewhat with her gaiety; as a result even I myself felt as if the pall
of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired
early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a wonderful thing
that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the midst of her terrible
trouble. Thank God for it, for then at least she can forget her care.
Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall
try it. Oh! for a dreamless sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_6 October, morning._--Another surprise. Mina woke me early, about the
same time as yesterday, and asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought
that it was another occasion for hypnotism, and without question went
for the Professor. He had evidently expected some such call, for I found
him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he could hear the
opening of the door of our room. He came at once; as he passed into the
room, he asked Mina if the others might come, too.

"No," she said quite simply, "it will not be necessary. You can tell
them just as well. I must go with you on your journey."

Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was. After a moment's pause he
asked:--

"But why?"

"You must take me with you. I am safer with you, and you shall be safer,
too."

"But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest
duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than
any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused,
embarrassed.

As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead:--

"I know. That is why I must go. I can tell you now, whilst the sun is
coming up; I may not be able again. I know that when the Count wills me
I must go. I know that if he tells me to come in secret, I must come by
wile; by any device to hoodwink--even Jonathan." God saw the look that
she turned on me as she spoke, and if there be indeed a Recording Angel
that look is noted to her everlasting honour. I could only clasp her
hand. I could not speak; my emotion was too great for even the relief of
tears. She went on:--

"You men are brave and strong. You are strong in your numbers, for you
can defy that which would break down the human endurance of one who had
to guard alone. Besides, I may be of service, since you can hypnotise me
and so learn that which even I myself do not know." Dr. Van Helsing said
very gravely:--

"Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and
together we shall do that which we go forth to achieve." When he had
spoken, Mina's long spell of silence made me look at her. She had fallen
back on her pillow asleep; she did not even wake when I had pulled up
the blind and let in the sunlight which flooded the room. Van Helsing
motioned to me to come with him quietly. We went to his room, and within
a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris were with us also.
He told them what Mina had said, and went on:--

"In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with a
new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony
to tell us so much as she has done; but it is most right, and we are
warned in time. There must be no chance lost, and in Varna we must be
ready to act the instant when that ship arrives."

"What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor
paused before replying:--

"We shall at the first board that ship; then, when we have identified
the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose on it. This we shall
fasten, for when it is there none can emerge; so at least says the
superstition. And to superstition must we trust at the first; it was
man's faith in the early, and it have its root in faith still. Then,
when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we
shall open the box, and--and all will be well."

"I shall not wait for any opportunity," said Morris. "When I see the box
I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a thousand
men looking on, and if I am to be wiped out for it the next moment!" I
grasped his hand instinctively and found it as firm as a piece of steel.
I think he understood my look; I hope he did.

"Good boy," said Dr. Van Helsing. "Brave boy. Quincey is all man. God
bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us shall lag behind or
pause from any fear. I do but say what we may do--what we must do. But,
indeed, indeed we cannot say what we shall do. There are so many things
which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that
until the moment we may not say. We shall all be armed, in all ways; and
when the time for the end has come, our effort shall not be lack. Now
let us to-day put all our affairs in order. Let all things which touch
on others dear to us, and who on us depend, be complete; for none of us
can tell what, or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, my own
affairs are regulate; and as I have nothing else to do, I shall go make
arrangements for the travel. I shall have all tickets and so forth for
our journey."

There was nothing further to be said, and we parted. I shall now settle
up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for whatever may come....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she
survive is my sole heir. If it should not be so, then the others who
have been so good to us shall have remainder.

It is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina's uneasiness calls my
attention to it. I am sure that there is something on her mind which the
time of exact sunset will reveal. These occasions are becoming harrowing
times for us all, for each sunrise and sunset opens up some new
danger--some new pain, which, however, may in God's will be means to a
good end. I write all these things in the diary since my darling must
not hear them now; but if it may be that she can see them again, they
shall be ready.

She is calling to me.




CHAPTER XXV

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_11 October, Evening._--Jonathan Harker has asked me to note this, as he
says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record kept.

I think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see Mrs.
Harker a little before the time of sunset. We have of late come to
understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom;
when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing
or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition
begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise or sunset, and lasts
till either the sun is high, or whilst the clouds are still aglow with
the rays streaming above the horizon. At first there is a sort of
negative condition, as if some tie were loosened, and then the absolute
freedom quickly follows; when, however, the freedom ceases the
change-back or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of
warning silence.

To-night, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the
signs of an internal struggle. I put it down myself to her making a
violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so. A very few
minutes, however, gave her complete control of herself; then, motioning
her husband to sit beside her on the sofa where she was half reclining,
she made the rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband's hand
in hers began:--

"We are all here together in freedom, for perhaps the last time! I know,
dear; I know that you will always be with me to the end." This was to
her husband whose hand had, as we could see, tightened upon hers. "In
the morning we go out upon our task, and God alone knows what may be in
store for any of us. You are going to be so good to me as to take me
with you. I know that all that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak
woman, whose soul perhaps is lost--no, no, not yet, but is at any rate
at stake--you will do. But you must remember that I am not as you are.
There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which
must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. Oh, my friends, you
know as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I know there
is one way out for me, you must not and I must not take it!" She looked
appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband.

"What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in a hoarse voice. "What is that
way, which we must not--may not--take?"

"That I may die now, either by my own hand or that of another, before
the greater evil is entirely wrought. I know, and you know, that were I
once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you
did my poor Lucy's. Were death, or the fear of death, the only thing
that stood in the way I would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the
friends who love me. But death is not all. I cannot believe that to die
in such a case, when there is hope before us and a bitter task to be
done, is God's will. Therefore, I, on my part, give up here the
certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the dark where may be the
blackest things that the world or the nether world holds!" We were all
silent, for we knew instinctively that this was only a prelude. The
faces of the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he
guessed better than any of us what was coming. She continued:--

"This is what I can give into the hotch-pot." I could not but note the
quaint legal phrase which she used in such a place, and with all
seriousness. "What will each of you give? Your lives I know," she went
on quickly, "that is easy for brave men. Your lives are God's, and you
can give them back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked
again questioningly, but this time avoided her husband's face. Quincey
seemed to understand; he nodded, and her face lit up. "Then I shall tell
you plainly what I want, for there must be no doubtful matter in this
connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you,
my beloved husband--that, should the time come, you will kill me."

"What is that time?" The voice was Quincey's, but it was low and
strained.

"When you shall be convinced that I am so changed that it is better that
I die that I may live. When I am thus dead in the flesh, then you will,
without a moment's delay, drive a stake through me and cut off my head;
or do whatever else may be wanting to give me rest!"

Quincey was the first to rise after the pause. He knelt down before her
and taking her hand in his said solemnly:--

"I'm only a rough fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a man should to
win such a distinction, but I swear to you by all that I hold sacred and
dear that, should the time ever come, I shall not flinch from the duty
that you have set us. And I promise you, too, that I shall make all
certain, for if I am only doubtful I shall take it that the time has
come!"

"My true friend!" was all she could say amid her fast-falling tears, as,
bending over, she kissed his hand.

"I swear the same, my dear Madam Mina!" said Van Helsing.

"And I!" said Lord Godalming, each of them in turn kneeling to her to
take the oath. I followed, myself. Then her husband turned to her
wan-eyed and with a greenish pallor which subdued the snowy whiteness of
his hair, and asked:--

"And must I, too, make such a promise, oh, my wife?"

"You too, my dearest," she said, with infinite yearning of pity in her
voice and eyes. "You must not shrink. You are nearest and dearest and
all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all
time. Think, dear, that there have been times when brave men have killed
their wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling into the
hands of the enemy. Their hands did not falter any the more because
those that they loved implored them to slay them. It is men's duty
towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! And oh, my
dear, if it is to be that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at
the hand of him that loves me best. Dr. Van Helsing, I have not
forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who loved"--she stopped
with a flying blush, and changed her phrase--"to him who had best right
to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to make
it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was his loving hand which
set me free from the awful thrall upon me."

"Again I swear!" came the Professor's resonant voice. Mrs. Harker
smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and
said:--

"And now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget:
this time, if it ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in
such case you must lose no time in using your opportunity. At such a
time I myself might be--nay! if the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued
with your enemy against you."

"One more request;" she became very solemn as she said this, "it is not
vital and necessary like the other, but I want you to do one thing for
me, if you will." We all acquiesced, but no one spoke; there was no need
to speak:--

"I want you to read the Burial Service." She was interrupted by a deep
groan from her husband; taking his hand in hers, she held it over her
heart, and continued: "You must read it over me some day. Whatever may
be the issue of all this fearful state of things, it will be a sweet
thought to all or some of us. You, my dearest, will I hope read it, for
then it will be in your voice in my memory for ever--come what may!"

"But oh, my dear one," he pleaded, "death is afar off from you."

"Nay," she said, holding up a warning hand. "I am deeper in death at
this moment than if the weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me!"

"Oh, my wife, must I read it?" he said, before he began.

"It would comfort me, my husband!" was all she said; and he began to
read when she had got the book ready.

"How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its
solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its
sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of bitter
truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been melted to the heart
had he seen that little group of loving and devoted friends kneeling
round that stricken and sorrowing lady; or heard the tender passion of
her husband's voice, as in tones so broken with emotion that often he
had to pause, he read the simple and beautiful service from the Burial
of the Dead. I--I cannot go on--words--and--v-voice--f-fail m-me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She was right in her instinct. Strange as it all was, bizarre as it may
hereafter seem even to us who felt its potent influence at the time, it
comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming
relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem so full of despair to any
of us as we had dreaded.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_15 October, Varna._--We left Charing Cross on the morning of the 12th,
got to Paris the same night, and took the places secured for us in the
Orient Express. We travelled night and day, arriving here at about five
o'clock. Lord Godalming went to the Consulate to see if any telegram had
arrived for him, whilst the rest of us came on to this hotel--"the
Odessus." The journey may have had incidents; I was, however, too eager
to get on, to care for them. Until the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into
port there will be no interest for me in anything in the wide world.
Thank God! Mina is well, and looks to be getting stronger; her colour is
coming back. She sleeps a great deal; throughout the journey she slept
nearly all the time. Before sunrise and sunset, however, she is very
wakeful and alert; and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to
hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he
had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as if by
habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have power at
these particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him. He
always asks her what she can see and hear. She answers to the first:--

"Nothing; all is dark." And to the second:--

"I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and the water rushing
by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is
high--I can hear it in the shrouds, and the bow throws back the foam."
It is evident that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on
her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four
telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect:
that the _Czarina Catherine_ had not been reported to Lloyd's from
anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should
send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He
was to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he might be
sure that there was a watch being kept at the other end of the wire.

We had dinner and went to bed early. To-morrow we are to see the
Vice-Consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board the ship
as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that our chance will be to get
on the boat between sunrise and sunset. The Count, even if he takes the
form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own volition, and
so cannot leave the ship. As he dare not change to man's form without
suspicion--which he evidently wishes to avoid--he must remain in the
box. If, then, we can come on board after sunrise, he is at our mercy;
for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor Lucy,
before he wakes. What mercy he shall get from us will not count for
much. We think that we shall not have much trouble with officials or the
seamen. Thank God! this is the country where bribery can do anything,
and we are well supplied with money. We have only to make sure that the
ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being
warned, and we shall be safe. Judge Moneybag will settle this case, I
think!

       *       *       *       *       *

_16 October._--Mina's report still the same: lapping waves and rushing
water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and
when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_ we shall be ready. As she must
pass the Dardanelles we are sure to have some report.

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 October._--Everything is pretty well fixed now, I think, to welcome
the Count on his return from his tour. Godalming told the shippers that
he fancied that the box sent aboard might contain something stolen from
a friend of his, and got a half consent that he might open it at his own
risk. The owner gave him a paper telling the Captain to give him every
facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship, and also a
similar authorisation to his agent at Varna. We have seen the agent, who
was much impressed with Godalming's kindly manner to him, and we are all
satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done. We
have already arranged what to do in case we get the box open. If the
Count is there, Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head at once and
drive a stake through his heart. Morris and Godalming and I shall
prevent interference, even if we have to use the arms which we shall
have ready. The Professor says that if we can so treat the Count's body,
it will soon after fall into dust. In such case there would be no
evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. But
even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and perhaps
some day this very script may be evidence to come between some of us and
a rope. For myself, I should take the chance only too thankfully if it
were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out our
intent. We have arranged with certain officials that the instant the
_Czarina Catherine_ is seen, we are to be informed by a special
messenger.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 October._--A whole week of waiting. Daily telegrams to Godalming,
but only the same story: "Not yet reported." Mina's morning and evening
hypnotic answer is unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking
masts.

_Telegram, October 24th._

_Rufus Smith, Lloyd's, London, to Lord Godalming, care of H. B. M.
Vice-Consul, Varna._

"_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_25 October._--How I miss my phonograph! To write diary with a pen is
irksome to me; but Van Helsing says I must. We were all wild with
excitement yesterday when Godalming got his telegram from Lloyd's. I
know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs.
Harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. After
all, it is not strange that she did not; for we took special care not to
let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to show any
excitement when we were in her presence. In old days she would, I am
sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tried to conceal it; but
in this way she is greatly changed during the past three weeks. The
lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is
getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and I are not satisfied. We
talk of her often; we have not, however, said a word to the others. It
would break poor Harker's heart--certainly his nerve--if he knew that we
had even a suspicion on the subject. Van Helsing examines, he tells me,
her teeth very carefully, whilst she is in the hypnotic condition, for
he says that so long as they do not begin to sharpen there is no active
danger of a change in her. If this change should come, it would be
necessary to take steps!... We both know what those steps would have to
be, though we do not mention our thoughts to each other. We should
neither of us shrink from the task--awful though it be to contemplate.
"Euthanasia" is an excellent and a comforting word! I am grateful to
whoever invented it.

It is only about 24 hours' sail from the Dardanelles to here, at the
rate the _Czarina Catherine_ has come from London. She should therefore
arrive some time in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in
before then, we are all about to retire early. We shall get up at one
o'clock, so as to be ready.

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 October, Noon_.--No news yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's
hypnotic report this morning was the same as usual, so it is possible
that we may get news at any moment. We men are all in a fever of
excitement, except Harker, who is calm; his hands are cold as ice, and
an hour ago I found him whetting the edge of the great Ghoorka knife
which he now always carries with him. It will be a bad lookout for the
Count if the edge of that "Kukri" ever touches his throat, driven by
that stern, ice-cold hand!

Van Helsing and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker to-day. About
noon she got into a sort of lethargy which we did not like; although we
kept silence to the others, we were neither of us happy about it. She
had been restless all the morning, so that we were at first glad to know
that she was sleeping. When, however, her husband mentioned casually
that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not wake her, we went to
her room to see for ourselves. She was breathing naturally and looked so
well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than
anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is no wonder
that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep
of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she had
been for days. At sunset she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he
may be in the Black Sea, the Count is hurrying to his destination. To
his doom, I trust!

       *       *       *       *       *

_26 October._--Another day and no tidings of the _Czarina Catherine_.
She ought to be here by now. That she is still journeying _somewhere_ is
apparent, for Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report at sunrise was still the
same. It is possible that the vessel may be lying by, at times, for fog;
some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog
both to north and south of the port. We must continue our watching, as
the ship may now be signalled any moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 October, Noon._--Most strange; no news yet of the ship we wait for.
Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning as usual: "lapping
waves and rushing water," though she added that "the waves were very
faint." The telegrams from London have been the same: "no further
report." Van Helsing is terribly anxious, and told me just now that he
fears the Count is escaping us. He added significantly:--

"I did not like that lethargy of Madam Mina's. Souls and memories can do
strange things during trance." I was about to ask him more, but Harker
just then came in, and he held up a warning hand. We must try to-night
at sunset to make her speak more fully when in her hypnotic state.

       *       *       *       *       *

     _28 October._--Telegram. _Rufus Smith, London, to Lord Godalming,
     care H. B. M. Vice Consul, Varna._

     "_Czarina Catherine_ reported entering Galatz at one o'clock
     to-day."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_28 October._--When the telegram came announcing the arrival in Galatz I
do not think it was such a shock to any of us as might have been
expected. True, we did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt would
come; but I think we all expected that something strange would happen.
The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things
would not be just as we had expected; we only waited to learn where the
change would occur. None the less, however, was it a surprise. I suppose
that nature works on such a hopeful basis that we believe against
ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know
that they will be. Transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels, even if
it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an odd experience and we all
took it differently. Van Helsing raised his hand over his head for a
moment, as though in remonstrance with the Almighty; but he said not a
word, and in a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set. Lord
Godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heavily. I was myself half
stunned and looked in wonder at one after another. Quincey Morris
tightened his belt with that quick movement which I knew so well; in our
old wandering days it meant "action." Mrs. Harker grew ghastly white, so
that the scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands
meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled--actually smiled--the
dark, bitter smile of one who is without hope; but at the same time his
action belied his words, for his hands instinctively sought the hilt of
the great Kukri knife and rested there. "When does the next train start
for Galatz?" said Van Helsing to us generally.

"At 6:30 to-morrow morning!" We all started, for the answer came from
Mrs. Harker.

"How on earth do you know?" said Art.

"You forget--or perhaps you do not know, though Jonathan does and so
does Dr. Van Helsing--that I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter I
always used to make up the time-tables, so as to be helpful to my
husband. I found it so useful sometimes, that I always make a study of
the time-tables now. I knew that if anything were to take us to Castle
Dracula we should go by Galatz, or at any rate through Bucharest, so I
learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not many to learn,
as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say."

"Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor.

"Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. Van Helsing shook his
head: "I fear not. This land is very different from yours or mine; even
if we did have a special, it would probably not arrive as soon as our
regular train. Moreover, we have something to prepare. We must think.
Now let us organize. You, friend Arthur, go to the train and get the
tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go in the morning. Do
you, friend Jonathan, go to the agent of the ship and get from him
letters to the agent in Galatz, with authority to make search the ship
just as it was here. Morris Quincey, you see the Vice-Consul, and get
his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do to make our way
smooth, so that no times be lost when over the Danube. John will stay
with Madam Mina and me, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you
may be delayed; and it will not matter when the sun set, since I am here
with Madam to make report."

"And I," said Mrs. Harker brightly, and more like her old self than she
had been for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways, and
shall think and write for you as I used to do. Something is shifting
from me in some strange way, and I feel freer than I have been of late!"
The three younger men looked happier at the moment as they seemed to
realise the significance of her words; but Van Helsing and I, turning to
each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the
time, however.

When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs.
Harker to look up the copy of the diaries and find him the part of
Harker's journal at the Castle. She went away to get it; when the door
was shut upon her he said to me:--

"We mean the same! speak out!"

"There is some change. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may
deceive us."

"Quite so. Do you know why I asked her to get the manuscript?"

"No!" said I, "unless it was to get an opportunity of seeing me alone."

"You are in part right, friend John, but only in part. I want to tell
you something. And oh, my friend, I am taking a great--a terrible--risk;
but I believe it is right. In the moment when Madam Mina said those
words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In
the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her
mind; or more like he took her to see him in his earth-box in the ship
with water rushing, just as it go free at rise and set of sun. He learn
then that we are here; for she have more to tell in her open life with
eyes to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box.
Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not.

"He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will come at his call;
but he cut her off--take her, as he can do, out of his own power, that
so she come not to him. Ah! there I have hope that our man-brains that
have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will
come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centuries,
that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and
therefore small. Here comes Madam Mina; not a word to her of her trance!
She know it not; and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when
we want all her hope, all her courage; when most we want all her great
brain which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet woman and have
a special power which the Count give her, and which he may not take away
altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall
learn. Oh, John, my friend, we are in awful straits. I fear, as I never
feared before. We can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!"

I thought that the Professor was going to break down and have hysterics,
just as he had when Lucy died, but with a great effort he controlled
himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into
the room, bright and happy-looking and, in the doing of work, seemingly
forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of sheets
of typewriting to Van Helsing. He looked over them gravely, his face
brightening up as he read. Then holding the pages between his finger and
thumb he said:--

"Friend John, to you with so much of experience already--and you, too,
dear Madam Mina, that are young--here is a lesson: do not fear ever to
think. A half-thought has been buzzing often in my brain, but I fear to
let him loose his wings. Here now, with more knowledge, I go back to
where that half-thought come from and I find that he be no half-thought
at all; that be a whole thought, though so young that he is not yet
strong to use his little wings. Nay, like the "Ugly Duck" of my friend
Hans Andersen, he be no duck-thought at all, but a big swan-thought that
sail nobly on big wings, when the time come for him to try them. See I
read here what Jonathan have written:--

"That other of his race who, in a later age, again and again, brought
his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was
beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had to come
alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered,
since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph."

"What does this tell us? Not much? no! The Count's child-thought see
nothing; therefore he speak so free. Your man-thought see nothing; my
man-thought see nothing, till just now. No! But there comes another word
from some one who speak without thought because she, too, know not what
it mean--what it _might_ mean. Just as there are elements which rest,
yet when in nature's course they move on their way and they touch--then
pouf! and there comes a flash of light, heaven wide, that blind and kill
and destroy some; but that show up all earth below for leagues and
leagues. Is it not so? Well, I shall explain. To begin, have you ever
study the philosophy of crime? 'Yes' and 'No.' You, John, yes; for it is
a study of insanity. You, no, Madam Mina; for crime touch you not--not
but once. Still, your mind works true, and argues not _a particulari ad
universale_. There is this peculiarity in criminals. It is so constant,
in all countries and at all times, that even police, who know not much
from philosophy, come to know it empirically, that _it is_. That is to
be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true
criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other.
This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and
resourceful; but he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of
child-brain in much. Now this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime
also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is of the child to do what he
have done. The little bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not
by principle, but empirically; and when he learn to do, then there is to
him the ground to start from to do more. '_Dos pou sto_,' said
Archimedes. 'Give me a fulcrum, and I shall move the world!' To do once,
is the fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have
the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same again every time,
just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I see that your eyes are
opened, and that to you the lightning flash show all the leagues," for
Mrs. Harker began to clap her hands and her eyes sparkled. He went on:--

"Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with
those so bright eyes." He took her hand and held it whilst she spoke.
His finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought instinctively and
unconsciously, as she spoke:--

"The Count is a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau and Lombroso would
so classify him, and _quâ_ criminal he is of imperfectly formed mind.
Thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a
clue, and the one page of it that we know--and that from his own
lips--tells that once before, when in what Mr. Morris would call a
'tight place,' he went back to his own country from the land he had
tried to invade, and thence, without losing purpose, prepared himself
for a new effort. He came again better equipped for his work; and won.
So he came to London to invade a new land. He was beaten, and when all
hope of success was lost, and his existence in danger, he fled back over
the sea to his home; just as formerly he had fled back over the Danube
from Turkey Land."

"Good, good! oh, you so clever lady!" said Van Helsing,
enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand. A moment later he
said to me, as calmly as though we had been having a sick-room
consultation:--

"Seventy-two only; and in all this excitement. I have hope." Turning to
her again, he said with keen expectation:--

"But go on. Go on! there is more to tell if you will. Be not afraid;
John and I know. I do in any case, and shall tell you if you are right.
Speak, without fear!"

"I will try to; but you will forgive me if I seem egotistical."

"Nay! fear not, you must be egotist, for it is of you that we think."

"Then, as he is criminal he is selfish; and as his intellect is small
and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one
purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the Danube,
leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on being
safe, careless of all. So his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat
from the terrible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful
night. I felt it! Oh, I felt it! Thank God, for His great mercy! My soul
is freer than it has been since that awful hour; and all that haunts me
is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have used my knowledge for
his ends." The Professor stood up:--

"He has so used your mind; and by it he has left us here in Varna,
whilst the ship that carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to
Galatz, where, doubtless, he had made preparation for escaping from us.
But his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be that, as ever is in
God's Providence, the very thing that the evil-doer most reckoned on for
his selfish good, turns out to be his chiefest harm. The hunter is taken
in his own snare, as the great Psalmist says. For now that he think he
is free from every trace of us all, and that he has escaped us with so
many hours to him, then his selfish child-brain will whisper him to
sleep. He think, too, that as he cut himself off from knowing your mind,
there can be no knowledge of him to you; there is where he fail! That
terrible baptism of blood which he give you makes you free to go to him
in spirit, as you have as yet done in your times of freedom, when the
sun rise and set. At such times you go by my volition and not by his;
and this power to good of you and others, as you have won from your
suffering at his hands. This is now all the more precious that he know
it not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from his
knowledge of our where. We, however, are not selfish, and we believe
that God is with us through all this blackness, and these many dark
hours. We shall follow him; and we shall not flinch; even if we peril
ourselves that we become like him. Friend John, this has been a great
hour; and it have done much to advance us on our way. You must be scribe
and write him all down, so that when the others return from their work
you can give it to them; then they shall know as we do."

And so I have written it whilst we wait their return, and Mrs. Harker
has written with her typewriter all since she brought the MS. to us.




CHAPTER XXVI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_29 October._--This is written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last
night we all assembled a little before the time of sunset. Each of us
had done his work as well as he could; so far as thought, and endeavour,
and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our journey, and
for our work when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs.
Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a longer and
more serious effort on the part of Van Helsing than has been usually
necessary, she sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but
this time the Professor had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty
resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:--

"I can see nothing; we are still; there are no waves lapping, but only a
steady swirl of water softly running against the hawser. I can hear
men's voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in
the rowlocks. A gun is fired somewhere; the echo of it seems far away.
There is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged
along. What is this? There is a gleam of light; I can feel the air
blowing upon me."

Here she stopped. She had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay
on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if lifting a
weight. Van Helsing and I looked at each other with understanding.
Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her intently, whilst
Harker's hand instinctively closed round the hilt of his Kukri. There
was a long pause. We all knew that the time when she could speak was
passing; but we felt that it was useless to say anything. Suddenly she
sat up, and, as she opened her eyes, said sweetly:--

"Would none of you like a cup of tea? You must all be so tired!" We
could only make her happy, and so acquiesced. She bustled off to get
tea; when she had gone Van Helsing said:--

"You see, my friends. _He_ is close to land: he has left his
earth-chest. But he has yet to get on shore. In the night he may lie
hidden somewhere; but if he be not carried on shore, or if the ship do
not touch it, he cannot achieve the land. In such case he can, if it be
in the night, change his form and can jump or fly on shore, as he did
at Whitby. But if the day come before he get on shore, then, unless he
be carried he cannot escape. And if he be carried, then the customs men
may discover what the box contain. Thus, in fine, if he escape not on
shore to-night, or before dawn, there will be the whole day lost to him.
We may then arrive in time; for if he escape not at night we shall come
on him in daytime, boxed up and at our mercy; for he dare not be his
true self, awake and visible, lest he be discovered."

There was no more to be said, so we waited in patience until the dawn;
at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker.

Early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her
response in her trance. The hypnotic stage was even longer in coming
than before; and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise was
so short that we began to despair. Van Helsing seemed to throw his whole
soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to his will she made
reply:--

"All is dark. I hear lapping water, level with me, and some creaking as
of wood on wood." She paused, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till
to-night.

And so it is that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of
expectation. We are due to arrive between two and three in the morning;
but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot
possibly get in till well after sun-up. Thus we shall have two more
hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker; either or both may possibly throw
more light on what is happening.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Sunset has come and gone. Fortunately it came at a time when
there was no distraction; for had it occurred whilst we were at a
station, we might not have secured the necessary calm and isolation.
Mrs. Harker yielded to the hypnotic influence even less readily than
this morning. I am in fear that her power of reading the Count's
sensations may die away, just when we want it most. It seems to me that
her imagination is beginning to work. Whilst she has been in the trance
hitherto she has confined herself to the simplest of facts. If this goes
on it may ultimately mislead us. If I thought that the Count's power
over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge it would be
a happy thought; but I am afraid that it may not be so. When she did
speak, her words were enigmatical:--

"Something is going out; I can feel it pass me like a cold wind. I can
hear, far off, confused sounds--as of men talking in strange tongues,
fierce-falling water, and the howling of wolves." She stopped and a
shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few seconds,
till, at the end, she shook as though in a palsy. She said no more, even
in answer to the Professor's imperative questioning. When she woke from
the trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid; but her mind was
all alert. She could not remember anything, but asked what she had said;
when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in
silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 October, 7 a. m._--We are near Galatz now, and I may not have time
to write later. Sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all.
Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance,
Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no
effect, however, until the regular time, when she yielded with a still
greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose. The Professor
lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with equal quickness:--

"All is dark. I hear water swirling by, level with my ears, and the
creaking of wood on wood. Cattle low far off. There is another sound, a
queer one like----" She stopped and grew white, and whiter still.

"Go on; go on! Speak, I command you!" said Van Helsing in an agonised
voice. At the same time there was despair in his eyes, for the risen sun
was reddening even Mrs. Harker's pale face. She opened her eyes, and we
all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost
unconcern:--

"Oh, Professor, why ask me to do what you know I can't? I don't remember
anything." Then, seeing the look of amazement on our faces, she said,
turning from one to the other with a troubled look:--

"What have I said? What have I done? I know nothing, only that I was
lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!'
It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I were a bad
child!"

"Oh, Madam Mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof be needed, of
how I love and honour you, when a word for your good, spoken more
earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it is to order her whom I
am proud to obey!"

The whistles are sounding; we are nearing Galatz. We are on fire with
anxiety and eagerness.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to the hotel where our rooms had been
ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared, since
he does not speak any foreign language. The forces were distributed
much as they had been at Varna, except that Lord Godalming went to the
Vice-Consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some
sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. Jonathan and the two
doctors went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival
of the _Czarina Catherine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Lord Godalming has returned. The Consul is away, and the
Vice-Consul sick; so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk.
He was very obliging, and offered to do anything in his power.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_30 October._--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I called
on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London firm of
Hapgood. They had received a wire from London, in answer to Lord
Godalming's telegraphed request, asking us to show them any civility in
their power. They were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once
on board the _Czarina Catherine_, which lay at anchor out in the river
harbour. There we saw the Captain, Donelson by name, who told us of his
voyage. He said that in all his life he had never had so favourable a
run.

"Man!" he said, "but it made us afeard, for we expeckit that we should
have to pay for it wi' some rare piece o' ill luck, so as to keep up the
average. It's no canny to run frae London to the Black Sea wi' a wind
ahint ye, as though the Deil himself were blawin' on yer sail for his
ain purpose. An' a' the time we could no speer a thing. Gin we were nigh
a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell on us and travelled wi' us,
till when after it had lifted and we looked out, the deil a thing could
we see. We ran by Gibraltar wi'oot bein' able to signal; an' till we
came to the Dardanelles and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we
never were within hail o' aught. At first I inclined to slack off sail
and beat about till the fog was lifted; but whiles, I thocht that if the
Deil was minded to get us into the Black Sea quick, he was like to do it
whether we would or no. If we had a quick voyage it would be no to our
miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who
had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no
hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition
and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who said:--

"Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and
he know when he meet his match!" The skipper was not displeased with the
compliment, and went on:--

"When we got past the Bosphorus the men began to grumble; some o' them,
the Roumanians, came and asked me to heave overboard a big box which had
been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just before we had started
frae London. I had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa
fingers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. Man! but the
supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot
their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I
felt a wee bit as they did anent something, though I wouldn't say it was
agin the big box. Well, on we went, and as the fog didn't let up for
five days I joost let the wind carry us; for if the Deil wanted to get
somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well,
we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a fair way and
deep water all the time; and two days ago, when the mornin' sun came
through the fog, we found ourselves just in the river opposite Galatz.
The Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the
box and fling it in the river. I had to argy wi' them aboot it wi' a
handspike; an' when the last o' them rose off the deck wi' his head in
his hand, I had convinced them that, evil eye or no evil eye, the
property and the trust of my owners were better in my hands than in the
river Danube. They had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to
fling in, and as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I'd let it
lie till we discharged in the port an' get rid o't althegither. We
didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor;
but in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came
aboard wi' an order, written to him from England, to receive a box
marked for one Count Dracula. Sure eneuch the matter was one ready to
his hand. He had his papers a' reet, an' glad I was to be rid o' the
dam' thing, for I was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it. If the Deil
did have any luggage aboord the ship, I'm thinkin' it was nane ither
than that same!"

"What was the name of the man who took it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing with
restrained eagerness.

"I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his
cabin, produced a receipt signed "Immanuel Hildesheim." Burgen-strasse
16 was the address. We found out that this was all the Captain knew; so
with thanks we came away.

We found Hildesheim in his office, a Hebrew of rather the Adelphi
Theatre type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez. His arguments were
pointed with specie--we doing the punctuation--and with a little
bargaining he told us what he knew. This turned out to be simple but
important. He had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling
him to receive, if possible before sunrise so as to avoid customs, a box
which would arrive at Galatz in the _Czarina Catherine_. This he was to
give in charge to a certain Petrof Skinsky, who dealt with the Slovaks
who traded down the river to the port. He had been paid for his work by
an English bank note, which had been duly cashed for gold at the Danube
International Bank. When Skinsky had come to him, he had taken him to
the ship and handed over the box, so as to save porterage. That was all
he knew.

We then sought for Skinsky, but were unable to find him. One of his
neighbours, who did not seem to bear him any affection, said that he had
gone away two days before, no one knew whither. This was corroborated by
his landlord, who had received by messenger the key of the house
together with the rent due, in English money. This had been between ten
and eleven o'clock last night. We were at a standstill again.

Whilst we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that
the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the churchyard of
St. Peter, and that the throat had been torn open as if by some wild
animal. Those we had been speaking with ran off to see the horror, the
women crying out "This is the work of a Slovak!" We hurried away lest we
should have been in some way drawn into the affair, and so detained.

As we came home we could arrive at no definite conclusion. We were all
convinced that the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where
that might be we would have to discover. With heavy hearts we came home
to the hotel to Mina.

When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina
again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is at
least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was
released from my promise to her.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 October, evening._--They were so tired and worn out and dispirited
that there was nothing to be done till they had some rest; so I asked
them all to lie down for half an hour whilst I should enter everything
up to the moment. I feel so grateful to the man who invented the
"Traveller's" typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for
me. I should have felt quite; astray doing the work if I had to write
with a pen....

It is all done; poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have suffered,
what must he be suffering now. He lies on the sofa hardly seeming to
breathe, and his whole body appears in collapse. His brows are knit; his
face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can
see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his thoughts. Oh!
if I could only help at all.... I shall do what I can.

I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and he has got me all the papers that I
have not yet seen.... Whilst they are resting, I shall go over all
carefully, and perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion. I shall try to
follow the Professor's example, and think without prejudice on the facts
before me....

       *       *       *       *       *

I do believe that under God's providence I have made a discovery. I
shall get the maps and look over them....

       *       *       *       *       *

I am more than ever sure that I am right. My new conclusion is ready, so
I shall get our party together and read it. They can judge it; it is
well to be accurate, and every minute is precious.


_Mina Harker's Memorandum._

(Entered in her Journal.)

_Ground of inquiry._--Count Dracula's problem is to get back to his own
place.

(_a_) He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evident; for had he
power to move himself as he wished he could go either as man, or wolf,
or bat, or in some other way. He evidently fears discovery or
interference, in the state of helplessness in which he must be--confined
as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box.

(_b_) _How is he to be taken?_--Here a process of exclusions may help
us. By road, by rail, by water?

1. _By Road._--There are endless difficulties, especially in leaving the
city.

(_x_) There are people; and people are curious, and investigate. A hint,
a surmise, a doubt as to what might be in the box, would destroy him.

(_y_) There are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers to pass.

(_z_) His pursuers might follow. This is his highest fear; and in order
to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as he can, even
his victim--me!

2. _By Rail._--There is no one in charge of the box. It would have to
take its chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies
on the track. True, he might escape at night; but what would he be, if
left in a strange place with no refuge that he could fly to? This is not
what he intends; and he does not mean to risk it.

3. _By Water._--Here is the safest way, in one respect, but with most
danger in another. On the water he is powerless except at night; even
then he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were
he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would
indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it were
unfriendly land, wherein he was not free to move, his position would
still be desperate.

We know from the record that he was on the water; so what we have to do
is to ascertain _what_ water.

The first thing is to realise exactly what he has done as yet; we may,
then, get a light on what his later task is to be.

_Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in London as part
of his general plan of action, when he was pressed for moments and had
to arrange as best he could.

_Secondly_ we must see, as well as we can surmise it from the facts we
know of, what he has done here.

As to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at Galatz, and sent
invoice to Varna to deceive us lest we should ascertain his means of
exit from England; his immediate and sole purpose then was to escape.
The proof of this, is the letter of instructions sent to Immanuel
Hildesheim to clear and take away the box _before sunrise_. There is
also the instruction to Petrof Skinsky. These we must only guess at; but
there must have been some letter or message, since Skinsky came to
Hildesheim.

That, so far, his plans were successful we know. The _Czarina Catherine_
made a phenomenally quick journey--so much so that Captain Donelson's
suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness
played the Count's game for him, and he ran with his favouring wind
through fogs and all till he brought up blindfold at Galatz. That the
Count's arrangements were well made, has been proved. Hildesheim cleared
the box, took it off, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it--and here
we lose the trail. We only know that the box is somewhere on the water,
moving along. The customs and the octroi, if there be any, have been
avoided.

Now we come to what the Count must have done after his arrival--_on
land_, at Galatz.

The box was given to Skinsky before sunrise. At sunrise the Count could
appear in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to
aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing
with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man's
remark, that the murder was the work of a Slovak, showed the general
feeling against his class. The Count wanted isolation.

My surmise is, this: that in London the Count decided to get back to his
castle by water, as the most safe and secret way. He was brought from
the castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks
who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were shipped for London.
Thus the Count had knowledge of the persons who could arrange this
service. When the box was on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he
came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as to
arranging the carriage of the box up some river. When this was done, and
he knew that all was in train, he blotted out his traces, as he thought,
by murdering his agent.

I have examined the map and find that the river most suitable for the
Slovaks to have ascended is either the Pruth or the Sereth. I read in
the typescript that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling
level with my ears and the creaking of wood. The Count in his box, then,
was on a river in an open boat--propelled probably either by oars or
poles, for the banks are near and it is working against stream. There
would be no such sound if floating down stream.

Of course it may not be either the Sereth or the Pruth, but we may
possibly investigate further. Now of these two, the Pruth is the more
easily navigated, but the Sereth is, at Fundu, joined by the Bistritza
which runs up round the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as
close to Dracula's castle as can be got by water.


_Mina Harker's Journal--continued._

When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms and kissed me. The
others kept shaking me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing said:--

"Our dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where
we were blinded. Now we are on the track once again, and this time we
may succeed. Our enemy is at his most helpless; and if we can come on
him by day, on the water, our task will be over. He has a start, but he
is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave his box lest those who carry
him may suspect; for them to suspect would be to prompt them to throw
him in the stream where he perish. This he knows, and will not. Now men,
to our Council of War; for, here and now, we must plan what each and all
shall do."

"I shall get a steam launch and follow him," said Lord Godalming.

"And I, horses to follow on the bank lest by chance he land," said Mr.
Morris.

"Good!" said the Professor, "both good. But neither must go alone. There
must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and
rough, and he carries rude arms." All the men smiled, for amongst them
they carried a small arsenal. Said Mr. Morris:--

"I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd, and
there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other
precautions; he made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker could
not quite hear or understand. We must be ready at all points." Dr.
Seward said:--

"I think I had better go with Quincey. We have been accustomed to hunt
together, and we two, well armed, will be a match for whatever may come
along. You must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary to fight the
Slovaks, and a chance thrust--for I don't suppose these fellows carry
guns--would undo all our plans. There must be no chances, this time; we
shall, not rest until the Count's head and body have been separated, and
we are sure that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at Jonathan as he
spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. I could see that the poor dear was
torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to be with me; but then the
boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ...
the ... the ... Vampire. (Why did I hesitate to write the word?) He was
silent awhile, and during his silence Dr. Van Helsing spoke:--

"Friend Jonathan, this is to you for twice reasons. First, because you
are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the
last; and again that it is your right to destroy him--that--which has
wrought such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina; she
will be my care, if I may. I am old. My legs are not so quick to run as
once; and I am not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to
fight with lethal weapons. But I can be of other service; I can fight in
other way. And I can die, if need be, as well as younger men. Now let
me say that what I would is this: while you, my Lord Godalming and
friend Jonathan go in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and
whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be
landed, I will take Madam Mina right into the heart of the enemy's
country. Whilst the old fox is tied in his box, floating on the running
stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid
of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to
perish--we shall go in the track where Jonathan went,--from Bistritz
over the Borgo, and find our way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam
Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall find our way--all
dark and unknown otherwise--after the first sunrise when we are near
that fateful place. There is much to be done, and other places to be
made sanctify, so that that nest of vipers be obliterated." Here
Jonathan interrupted him hotly:--

"Do you mean to say, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina,
in her sad case and tainted as she is with that devil's illness, right
into the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or
Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on:--

"Do you know what the place is? Have you seen that awful den of hellish
infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every
speck of dust that whirls in the wind a devouring monster in embryo?
Have you felt the Vampire's lips upon your throat?" Here he turned to
me, and as his eyes lit on my forehead he threw up his arms with a cry:
"Oh, my God, what have we done to have this terror upon us!" and he sank
down on the sofa in a collapse of misery. The Professor's voice, as he
spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to vibrate in the air, calmed
us all:--

"Oh, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina from that awful
place that I would go. God forbid that I should take her into that
place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not
see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with their own eyes what
is to be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are in
terrible straits. If the Count escape us this time--and he is strong and
subtle and cunning--he may choose to sleep him for a century, and then
in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him to keep him
company, and would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw. You have
told us of their gloating lips; you heard their ribald laugh as they
clutched the moving bag that the Count threw to them. You shudder; and
well may it be. Forgive me that I make you so much pain, but it is
necessary. My friend, is it not a dire need for the which I am giving,
possibly my life? If it were that any one went into that place to stay,
it is I who would have to go to keep them company."

"Do as you will," said Jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, "we
are in the hands of God!"

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the way that these brave men worked.
How can women help loving men when they are so earnest, and so true, and
so brave! And, too, it made me think of the wonderful power of money!
What can it not do when it is properly applied; and what might it do
when basely used. I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming is rich, and
that both he and Mr. Morris, who also has plenty of money, are willing
to spend it so freely. For if they did not, our little expedition could
not start, either so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within
another hour. It is not three hours since it was arranged what part each
of us was to do; and now Lord Godalming and Jonathan have a lovely steam
launch, with steam up ready to start at a moment's notice. Dr. Seward
and Mr. Morris have half a dozen good horses, well appointed. We have
all the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be had. Professor
Van Helsing and I are to leave by the 11:40 train to-night for Veresti,
where we are to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass. We are
bringing a good deal of ready money, as we are to buy a carriage and
horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can trust
in the matter. The Professor knows something of a great many languages,
so we shall get on all right. We have all got arms, even for me a
large-bore revolver; Jonathan would not be happy unless I was armed like
the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest do; the scar on my
forehead forbids that. Dear Dr. Van Helsing comforts me by telling me
that I am fully armed as there may be wolves; the weather is getting
colder every hour, and there are snow-flurries which come and go as
warnings.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--It took all my courage to say good-bye to my darling. We may
never meet again. Courage, Mina! the Professor is looking at you keenly;
his look is a warning. There must be no tears now--unless it may be that
God will let them fall in gladness.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_October 30. Night._--I am writing this in the light from the furnace
door of the steam launch: Lord Godalming is firing up. He is an
experienced hand at the work, as he has had for years a launch of his
own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our
plans, we finally decided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if any
waterway was chosen for the Count's escape back to his Castle, the
Sereth and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the one. We took
it, that somewhere about the 47th degree, north latitude, would be the
place chosen for the crossing the country between the river and the
Carpathians. We have no fear in running at good speed up the river at
night; there is plenty of water, and the banks are wide enough apart to
make steaming, even in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to
sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one to be on
watch. But I cannot sleep--how can I with the terrible danger hanging
over my darling, and her going out into that awful place.... My only
comfort is that we are in the hands of God. Only for that faith it would
be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all the trouble. Mr.
Morris and Dr. Seward were off on their long ride before we started;
they are to keep up the right bank, far enough off to get on higher
lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following
of its curves. They have, for the first stages, two men to ride and lead
their spare horses--four in all, so as not to excite curiosity. When
they dismiss the men, which shall be shortly, they shall themselves look
after the horses. It may be necessary for us to join forces; if so they
can mount our whole party. One of the saddles has a movable horn, and
can be easily adapted for Mina, if required.

It is a wild adventure we are on. Here, as we are rushing along through
the darkness, with the cold from the river seeming to rise up and strike
us; with all the mysterious voices of the night around us, it all comes
home. We seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways; into
a whole world of dark and dreadful things. Godalming is shutting the
furnace door....

       *       *       *       *       *

_31 October._--Still hurrying along. The day has come, and Godalming is
sleeping. I am on watch. The morning is bitterly cold; the furnace heat
is grateful, though we have heavy fur coats. As yet we have passed only
a few open boats, but none of them had on board any box or package of
anything like the size of the one we seek. The men were scared every
time we turned our electric lamp on them, and fell on their knees and
prayed.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of the
kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we are wrong
in our surmise our chance is gone. We have over-hauled every boat, big
and little. Early this morning, one crew took us for a Government boat,
and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of smoothing matters,
so at Fundu, where the Bistritza runs into the Sereth, we got a
Roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously. With every boat which we
have over-hauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had every
deference shown to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose
to ask or do. Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them,
going at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on board. This
was before they came to Fundu, so they could not tell us whether the
boat turned into the Bistritza or continued on up the Sereth. At Fundu
we could not hear of any such boat, so she must have passed there in the
night. I am feeling very sleepy; the cold is perhaps beginning to tell
upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he
shall keep the first watch. God bless him for all his goodness to poor
dear Mina and me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 November, morning._--It is broad daylight. That good fellow would not
wake me. He says it would have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and
was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to have slept
so long, and let him watch all night; but he was quite right. I am a new
man this morning; and, as I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can do
all that is necessary both as to minding the engine, steering, and
keeping watch. I can feel that my strength and energy are coming back to
me. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to
Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to get the
carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they
would be about now at the Borgo Pass. God guide and help them! I am
afraid to think what may happen. If we could only go faster! but we
cannot; the engines are throbbing and doing their utmost. I wonder how
Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are getting on. There seem to be endless
streams running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them
are very large--at present, at all events, though they are terrible
doubtless in winter and when the snow melts--the horsemen may not have
met much obstruction. I hope that before we get to Strasba we may see
them; for if by that time we have not overtaken the Count, it may be
necessary to take counsel together what to do next.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_2 November._--Three days on the road. No news, and no time to write it
if there had been, for every moment is precious. We have had only the
rest needful for the horses; but we are both bearing it wonderfully.
Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on;
we shall never feel happy till we get the launch in sight again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 November._--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the
Bistritza. I wish it wasn't so cold. There are signs of snow coming; and
if it falls heavy it will stop us. In such case we must get a sledge and
go on, Russian fashion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 November._--To-day we heard of the launch having been detained by an
accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get
up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up
only a few hours before. Godalming is an amateur fitter himself, and
evidently it was he who put the launch in trim again. Finally, they got
up the rapids all right, with local help, and are off on the chase
afresh. I fear that the boat is not any better for the accident; the
peasantry tell us that after she got upon smooth water again, she kept
stopping every now and again so long as she was in sight. We must push
on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that
this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotise me at all, and that all I
could say was: "dark and quiet." He is off now buying a carriage and
horses. He says that he will later on try to buy additional horses, so
that we may be able to change them on the way. We have something more
than 70 miles before us. The country is lovely, and most interesting; if
only we were under different conditions, how delightful it would be to
see it all. If Jonathan and I were driving through it alone what a
pleasure it would be. To stop and see people, and learn something of
their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the colour and
picturesqueness of the whole wild, beautiful country and the quaint
people! But, alas!--

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Dr. Van Helsing has returned. He has got the carriage and
horses; we are to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The
landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough
for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to
me that it may be a week before we can get any good food again. He has
been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful lot of fur coats
and wraps, and all sorts of warm things. There will not be any chance of
our being cold.

       *       *       *       *       *

We shall soon be off. I am afraid to think what may happen to us. We are
truly in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray Him,
with all the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will watch over
my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I
loved him and honoured him more than I can say, and that my latest and
truest thought will be always for him.




CHAPTER XXVII

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 November._--All day long we have travelled, and at a good speed. The
horses seem to know that they are being kindly treated, for they go
willingly their full stage at best speed. We have now had so many
changes and find the same thing so constantly that we are encouraged to
think that the journey will be an easy one. Dr. Van Helsing is laconic;
he tells the farmers that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them well
to make the exchange of horses. We get hot soup, or coffee, or tea; and
off we go. It is a lovely country; full of beauties of all imaginable
kinds, and the people are brave, and strong, and simple, and seem full
of nice qualities. They are _very, very_ superstitious. In the first
house where we stopped, when the woman who served us saw the scar on my
forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me, to
keep off the evil eye. I believe they went to the trouble of putting an
extra amount of garlic into our food; and I can't abide garlic. Ever
since then I have taken care not to take off my hat or veil, and so have
escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we have no
driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal; but I daresay
that fear of the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the way. The
Professor seems tireless; all day he would not take any rest, though he
made me sleep for a long spell. At sunset time he hypnotised me, and he
says that I answered as usual "darkness, lapping water and creaking
wood"; so our enemy is still on the river. I am afraid to think of
Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself. I write
this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be got ready. Dr.
Van Helsing is sleeping, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and
grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep
he is instinct with resolution. When we have well started I must make
him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell him that we have days before us,
and we must not break down when most of all his strength will be
needed.... All is ready; we are off shortly.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 November, morning._--I was successful, and we took turns driving all
night; now the day is on us, bright though cold. There is a strange
heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of a better word; I mean
that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep
us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered
"darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as
they ascend. I do hope that my darling will not run any chance of
danger--more than need be; but we are in God's hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 November, night._--All day long driving. The country gets wilder as
we go, and the great spurs of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed
so far from us and so low on the horizon, now seem to gather round us
and tower in front. We both seem in good spirits; I think we make an
effort each to cheer the other; in the doing so we cheer ourselves. Dr.
Van Helsing says that by morning we shall reach the Borgo Pass. The
houses are very few here now, and the Professor says that the last horse
we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to change. He
got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we have a rude
four-in-hand. The dear horses are patient and good, and they give us no
trouble. We are not worried with other travellers, and so even I can
drive. We shall get to the Pass in daylight; we do not want to arrive
before. So we take it easy, and have each a long rest in turn. Oh, what
will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the place where my poor
darling suffered so much. God grant that we may be guided aright, and
that He will deign to watch over my husband and those dear to us both,
and who are in such deadly peril. As for me, I am not worthy in His
sight. Alas! I am unclean to His eyes, and shall be until He may deign
to let me stand forth in His sight as one of those who have not incurred
His wrath.


_Memorandum by Abraham Van Helsing._

_4 November._--This to my old and true friend John Seward, M.D., of
Purfleet, London, in case I may not see him. It may explain. It is
morning, and I write by a fire which all the night I have kept
alive--Madam Mina aiding me. It is cold, cold; so cold that the grey
heavy sky is full of snow, which when it falls will settle for all
winter as the ground is hardening to receive it. It seems to have
affected Madam Mina; she has been so heavy of head all day that she was
not like herself. She sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! She who is usual
so alert, have done literally nothing all the day; she even have lost
her appetite. She make no entry into her little diary, she who write so
faithful at every pause. Something whisper to me that all is not well.
However, to-night she is more _vif_. Her long sleep all day have refresh
and restore her, for now she is all sweet and bright as ever. At sunset
I try to hypnotise her, but alas! with no effect; the power has grown
less and less with each day, and to-night it fail me altogether. Well,
God's will be done--whatever it may be, and whithersoever it may lead!

Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I
must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go
unrecorded.

We got to the Borgo Pass just after sunrise yesterday morning. When I
saw the signs of the dawn I got ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our
carriage, and got down so that there might be no disturbance. I made a
couch with furs, and Madam Mina, lying down, yield herself as usual, but
more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnotic sleep. As
before, came the answer: "darkness and the swirling of water." Then she
woke, bright and radiant and we go on our way and soon reach the Pass.
At this time and place, she become all on fire with zeal; some new
guiding power be in her manifested, for she point to a road and say:--

"This is the way."

"How know you it?" I ask.

"Of course I know it," she answer, and with a pause, add: "Have not my
Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?"

At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that there be only one
such by-road. It is used but little, and very different from the coach
road from the Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and
more of use.

So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we
sure that they were roads at all, for they be neglect and light snow
have fallen--the horses know and they only. I give rein to them, and
they go on so patient. By-and-by we find all the things which Jonathan
have note in that wonderful diary of him. Then we go on for long, long
hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and
she succeed. She sleep all the time; till at the last, I feel myself to
suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. But she sleep on, and I may
not wake her though I try. I do not wish to try too hard lest I harm
her; for I know that she have suffer much, and sleep at times be
all-in-all to her. I think I drowse myself, for all of sudden I feel
guilt, as though I have done something; I find myself bolt up, with the
reins in my hand, and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. I
look down and find Madam Mina still sleep. It is now not far off sunset
time, and over the snow the light of the sun flow in big yellow flood,
so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep.
For we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though
it were the end of the world.

Then I arouse Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and
then I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep not, being as
though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once I find her and
myself in dark; so I look round, and find that the sun have gone down.
Madam Mina laugh, and I turn and look at her. She is now quite awake,
and look so well as I never saw her since that night at Carfax when we
first enter the Count's house. I am amaze, and not at ease then; but she
is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I forget all fear. I
light a fire, for we have brought supply of wood with us, and she
prepare food while I undo the horses and set them, tethered in shelter,
to feed. Then when I return to the fire she have my supper ready. I go
to help her; but she smile, and tell me that she have eat already--that
she was so hungry that she would not wait. I like it not, and I have
grave doubts; but I fear to affright her, and so I am silent of it. She
help me and I eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the
fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. But presently I forget all
of watching; and when I sudden remember that I watch, I find her lying
quiet, but awake, and looking at me with so bright eyes. Once, twice
more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I
wake I try to hypnotise her; but alas! though she shut her eyes
obedient, she may not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and then
sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not wake. I have
to lift her up, and place her sleeping in the carriage when I have
harnessed the horses and made all ready. Madam still sleep, and she look
in her sleep more healthy and more redder than before. And I like it
not. And I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am afraid of all things--even
to think but I must go on my way. The stake we play for is life and
death, or more than these, and we must not flinch.

       *       *       *       *       *

_5 November, morning._--Let me be accurate in everything, for though you
and I have seen some strange things together, you may at the first think
that I, Van Helsing, am mad--that the many horrors and the so long
strain on nerves has at the last turn my brain.

All yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to the mountains, and
moving into a more and more wild and desert land. There are great,
frowning precipices and much falling water, and Nature seem to have held
sometime her carnival. Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I
did have hunger and appeased it, I could not waken her--even for food. I
began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon her, tainted as
she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be
that she sleep all the day, it shall also be that I do not sleep at
night." As we travel on the rough road, for a road of an ancient and
imperfect kind there was, I held down my head and slept. Again I waked
with a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found Madam Mina still
sleeping, and the sun low down. But all was indeed changed; the frowning
mountains seemed further away, and we were near the top of a
steep-rising hill, on summit of which was such a castle as Jonathan tell
of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill,
the end was near.

I woke Madam Mina, and again tried to hypnotise her; but alas!
unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for
even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and
all was for a time in a great twilight--I took out the horses and fed
them in what shelter I could. Then I make a fire; and near it I make
Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid
her rugs. I got ready food: but she would not eat, simply saying that
she had not hunger. I did not press her, knowing her unavailingness. But
I myself eat, for I must needs now be strong for all. Then, with the
fear on me of what might be, I drew a ring so big for her comfort, round
where Madam Mina sat; and over the ring I passed some of the wafer, and
I broke it fine so that all was well guarded. She sat still all the
time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the
snow was not more pale; and no word she said. But when I drew near, she
clung to me, and I could know that the poor soul shook her from head to
feet with a tremor that was pain to feel. I said to her presently, when
she had grown more quiet:--

"Will you not come over to the fire?" for I wished to make a test of
what she could. She rose obedient, but when she have made a step she
stopped, and stood as one stricken.

"Why not go on?" I asked. She shook her head, and, coming back, sat
down in her place. Then, looking at me with open eyes, as of one waked
from sleep, she said simply:--

"I cannot!" and remained silent. I rejoiced, for I knew that what she
could not, none of those that we dreaded could. Though there might be
danger to her body, yet her soul was safe!

Presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their tethers till I
came to them and quieted them. When they did feel my hands on them, they
whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and were quiet for a
time. Many times through the night did I come to them, till it arrive to
the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time my coming was
with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was
about stepping forth to replenish it, for now the snow came in flying
sweeps and with it a chill mist. Even in the dark there was a light of
some kind, as there ever is over snow; and it seemed as though the
snow-flurries and the wreaths of mist took shape as of women with
trailing garments. All was in dead, grim silence only that the horses
whinnied and cowered, as if in terror of the worst. I began to
fear--horrible fears; but then came to me the sense of safety in that
ring wherein I stood. I began, too, to think that my imaginings were of
the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have gone through, and
all the terrible anxiety. It was as though my memories of all Jonathan's
horrid experience were befooling me; for the snow flakes and the mist
began to wheel and circle round, till I could get as though a shadowy
glimpse of those women that would have kissed him. And then the horses
cowered lower and lower, and moaned in terror as men do in pain. Even
the madness of fright was not to them, so that they could break away. I
feared for my dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and
circled round. I looked at her, but she sat calm, and smiled at me; when
I would have stepped to the fire to replenish it, she caught me and held
me back, and whispered, like a voice that one hears in a dream, so low
it was:--

"No! No! Do not go without. Here you are safe!" I turned to her, and
looking in her eyes, said:--

"But you? It is for you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low
and unreal, and said:--

"Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? None safer in all the world from them
than I am," and as I wondered at the meaning of her words, a puff of
wind made the flame leap up, and I see the red scar on her forehead.
Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the
wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without
the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not
take away my reason, for I saw it through my eyes--there were before me
in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the room, when
they would have kissed his throat. I knew the swaying round forms, the
bright hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddy colour, the voluptuous
lips. They smiled ever at poor dear Madam Mina; and as their laugh came
through the silence of the night, they twined their arms and pointed to
her, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were
of the intolerable sweetness of the water-glasses:--

"Come, sister. Come to us. Come! Come!" In fear I turned to my poor
Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the
terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my
heart that was all of hope. God be thanked she was not, yet, of them. I
seized some of the firewood which was by me, and holding out some of the
Wafer, advanced on them towards the fire. They drew back before me, and
laughed their low horrid laugh. I fed the fire, and feared them not; for
I knew that we were safe within our protections. They could not
approach, me, whilst so armed, nor Madam Mina whilst she remained within
the ring, which she could not leave no more than they could enter. The
horses had ceased to moan, and lay still on the ground; the snow fell on
them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that there was for the poor
beasts no more of terror.

And so we remained till the red of the dawn to fall through the
snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of woe and terror; but
when that beautiful sun began to climb the horizon life was to me again.
At the first coming of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the
whirling mist and snow; the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away
towards the castle, and were lost.

Instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turned to Madam Mina, intending
to hypnotise her; but she lay in a deep and sudden sleep, from which I
could not wake her. I tried to hypnotise through her sleep, but she made
no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have
made my fire and have seen the horses, they are all dead. To-day I have
much to do here, and I keep waiting till the sun is up high; for there
may be places where I must go, where that sunlight, though snow and mist
obscure it, will be to me a safety.

I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I will to my terrible
work. Madam Mina still sleeps; and, God be thanked! she is calm in her
sleep....


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a terrible
thing for us. Only for it we should have overtaken the boat long ago;
and by now my dear Mina would have been free. I fear to think of her,
off on the wolds near that horrid place. We have got horses, and we
follow on the track. I note this whilst Godalming is getting ready. We
have our arms. The Szgany must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only
Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more
Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_5 November._--With the dawn we saw the body of Szgany before us dashing
away from the river with their leiter-wagon. They surrounded it in a
cluster, and hurried along as though beset. The snow is falling lightly
and there is a strange excitement in the air. It may be our own
feelings, but the depression is strange. Far off I hear the howling of
wolves; the snow brings them down from the mountains, and there are
dangers to all of us, and from all sides. The horses are nearly ready,
and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows who,
or where, or what, or when, or how it may be....


_Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._

_5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that mercy
at all events, though the proving it has been dreadful. When I left
Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy circle, I took my way to the castle.
The blacksmith hammer which I took in the carriage from Veresti was
useful; though the doors were all open I broke them off the rusty
hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chance should close them, so that
being entered I might not get out. Jonathan's bitter experience served
me here. By memory of his diary I found my way to the old chapel, for I
knew that here my work lay. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if
there was some sulphurous fume, which at times made me dizzy. Either
there was a roaring in my ears or I heard afar off the howl of wolves.
Then I bethought me of my dear Madam Mina, and I was in terrible plight.
The dilemma had me between his horns.

Her, I had not dare to take into this place, but left safe from the
Vampire in that Holy circle; and yet even there would be the wolf! I
resolve me that my work lay here, and that as to the wolves we must
submit, if it were God's will. At any rate it was only death and
freedom beyond. So did I choose for her. Had it but been for myself the
choice had been easy, the maw of the wolf were better to rest in than
the grave of the Vampire! So I make my choice to go on with my work.

I knew that there were at least three graves to find--graves that are
inhabit; so I search, and search, and I find one of them. She lay in her
Vampire sleep, so full of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as
though I have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old time, when
such things were, many a man who set forth to do such a task as mine,
found at the last his heart fail him, and then his nerve. So he delay,
and delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascination of the
wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset
come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the fair
woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a
kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire
fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!...

There is some fascination, surely, when I am moved by the mere presence
of such an one, even lying as she lay in a tomb fretted with age and
heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such
as the lairs of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van Helsing,
with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--I was moved to a
yearning for delay which seemed to paralyse my faculties and to clog my
very soul. It may have been that the need of natural sleep, and the
strange oppression of the air were beginning to overcome me. Certain it
was that I was lapsing into sleep, the open-eyed sleep of one who yields
to a sweet fascination, when there came through the snow-stilled air a
long, low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound
of a clarion. For it was the voice of my dear Madam Mina that I heard.

Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching
away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared not
pause to look on her as I had on her sister, lest once more I should
begin to be enthrall; but I go on searching until, presently, I find in
a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other fair sister
which, like Jonathan I had seen to gather herself out of the atoms of
the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so
exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in me, which calls
some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made my head whirl
with new emotion. But God be thanked, that soul-wail of my dear Madam
Mina had not died out of my ears; and, before the spell could be wrought
further upon me, I had nerved myself to my wild work. By this time I had
searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as I could tell; and as
there had been only three of these Un-Dead phantoms around us in the
night, I took it that there were no more of active Un-Dead existent.
There was one great tomb more lordly than all the rest; huge it was, and
nobly proportioned. On it was but one word

                                DRACULA.

This then was the Un-Dead home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many more
were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain what I knew.
Before I began to restore these women to their dead selves through my
awful work, I laid in Dracula's tomb some of the Wafer, and so banished
him from it, Un-Dead, for ever.

Then began my terrible task, and I dreaded it. Had it been but one, it
had been easy, comparative. But three! To begin twice more after I had
been through a deed of horror; for if it was terrible with the sweet
Miss Lucy, what would it not be with these strange ones who had survived
through centuries, and who had been strengthened by the passing of the
years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives....

Oh, my friend John, but it was butcher work; had I not been nerved by
thoughts of other dead, and of the living over whom hung such a pall of
fear, I could not have gone on. I tremble and tremble even yet, though
till all was over, God be thanked, my nerve did stand. Had I not seen
the repose in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just
ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been
won, I could not have gone further with my butchery. I could not have
endured the horrid screeching as the stake drove home; the plunging of
writhing form, and lips of bloody foam. I should have fled in terror and
left my work undone. But it is over! And the poor souls, I can pity them
now and weep, as I think of them placid each in her full sleep of death
for a short moment ere fading. For, friend John, hardly had my knife
severed the head of each, before the whole body began to melt away and
crumble in to its native dust, as though the death that should have come
centuries agone had at last assert himself and say at once and loud "I
am here!"

Before I left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can
the Count enter there Un-Dead.

When I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from her
sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in pain that I had endured too much.

"Come!" she said, "come away from this awful place! Let us go to meet my
husband who is, I know, coming towards us." She was looking thin and
pale and weak; but her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was
glad to see her paleness and her illness, for my mind was full of the
fresh horror of that ruddy vampire sleep.

And so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go eastward to meet
our friends--and _him_--whom Madam Mina tell me that she _know_ are
coming to meet us.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_6 November._--It was late in the afternoon when the Professor and I
took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did
not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take
heavy rugs and wraps with us; we dared not face the possibility of being
left without warmth in the cold and the snow. We had to take some of our
provisions, too, for we were in a perfect desolation, and, so far as we
could see through the snowfall, there was not even the sign of
habitation. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with the heavy
walking and sat down to rest. Then we looked back and saw where the
clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were so deep under
the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the
Carpathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its grandeur,
perched a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer precipice, and with
seemingly a great gap between it and the steep of the adjacent mountain
on any side. There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We
could hear the distant howling of wolves. They were far off, but the
sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was
full of terror. I knew from the way Dr. Van Helsing was searching about
that he was trying to seek some strategic point, where we would be less
exposed in case of attack. The rough roadway still led downwards; we
could trace it through the drifted snow.

In a little while the Professor signalled to me, so I got up and joined
him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of natural hollow in a rock,
with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders. He took me by the
hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be in shelter; and
if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one." He brought in our
furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some provisions and
forced them upon me. But I could not eat; to even try to do so was
repulsive to me, and, much as I would have liked to please him, I could
not bring myself to the attempt. He looked very sad, but did not
reproach me. Taking his field-glasses from the case, he stood on the top
of the rock, and began to search the horizon. Suddenly he called out:--

"Look! Madam Mina, look! look!" I sprang up and stood beside him on the
rock; he handed me his glasses and pointed. The snow was now falling
more heavily, and swirled about fiercely, for a high wind was beginning
to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the
snow flurries and I could see a long way round. From the height where we
were it was possible to see a great distance; and far off, beyond the
white waste of snow, I could see the river lying like a black ribbon in
kinks and curls as it wound its way. Straight in front of us and not far
off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not noticed before--came a
group of mounted men hurrying along. In the midst of them was a cart, a
long leiter-wagon which swept from side to side, like a dog's tail
wagging, with each stern inequality of the road. Outlined against the
snow as they were, I could see from the men's clothes that they were
peasants or gypsies of some kind.

On the cart was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I saw it, for I
felt that the end was coming. The evening was now drawing close, and
well I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then imprisoned
there, would take new freedom and could in any of many forms elude all
pursuit. In fear I turned to the Professor; to my consternation,
however, he was not there. An instant later, I saw him below me. Round
the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shelter in last
night. When he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:--

"At least you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took the glasses from
me, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us.
"See," he said, "they come quickly; they are flogging the horses, and
galloping as hard as they can." He paused and went on in a hollow
voice:--

"They are racing for the sunset. We may be too late. God's will be
done!" Down came another blinding rush of driving snow, and the whole
landscape was blotted out. It soon passed, however, and once more his
glasses were fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:--

"Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the
south. It must be Quincey and John. Take the glass. Look before the snow
blots it all out!" I took it and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward
and Mr. Morris. I knew at all events that neither of them was Jonathan.
At the same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off; looking around
I saw on the north side of the coming party two other men, riding at
break-neck speed. One of them I knew was Jonathan, and the other I took,
of course, to be Lord Godalming. They, too, were pursuing the party with
the cart. When I told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy,
and, after looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he
laid his Winchester rifle ready for use against the boulder at the
opening of our shelter. "They are all converging," he said. "When the
time comes we shall have gypsies on all sides." I got out my revolver
ready to hand, for whilst we were speaking the howling of wolves came
louder and closer. When the snow storm abated a moment we looked again.
It was strange to see the snow falling in such heavy flakes close to us,
and beyond, the sun shining more and more brightly as it sank down
towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could
see here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger
numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey.

Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now in
fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us in
circling eddies. At times we could not see an arm's length before us;
but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to
clear the air-space around us so that we could see afar off. We had of
late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew
with fair accuracy when it would be; and we knew that before long the
sun would set. It was hard to believe that by our watches it was less
than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the various
bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now with fiercer
and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly
had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts,
the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each
party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did
not seem to realise, or at least to care, that they were pursued; they
seemed, however, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dropped lower
and lower on the mountain tops.

Closer and closer they drew. The Professor and I crouched down behind
our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see that he was determined
that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our
presence.

All at once two voices shouted out to: "Halt!" One was my Jonathan's,
raised in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute
tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, but
there was no mistaking the tone, in whatever tongue the words were
spoken. Instinctively they reined in, and at the instant Lord Godalming
and Jonathan dashed up at one side and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on the
other. The leader of the gypsies, a splendid-looking fellow who sat his
horse like a centaur, waved them back, and in a fierce voice gave to his
companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses which sprang
forward; but the four men raised their Winchester rifles, and in an
unmistakable way commanded them to stop. At the same moment Dr. Van
Helsing and I rose behind the rock and pointed our weapons at them.
Seeing that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew
up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man of the
gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held
himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant.

The leader, with a quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out in
front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the hill
tops--and then to the castle, said something which I did not understand.
For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their horses
and dashed towards the cart. I should have felt terrible fear at seeing
Jonathan in such danger, but that the ardour of battle must have been
upon me as well as the rest of them; I felt no fear, but only a wild,
surging desire to do something. Seeing the quick movement of our
parties, the leader of the gypsies gave a command; his men instantly
formed round the cart in a sort of undisciplined endeavour, each one
shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness to carry out the
order.

In the midst of this I could see that Jonathan on one side of the ring
of men, and Quincey on the other, were forcing a way to the cart; it was
evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun
should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder them. Neither the
levelled weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies in front, nor
the howling of the wolves behind, appeared to even attract their
attention. Jonathan's impetuosity, and the manifest singleness of his
purpose, seemed to overawe those in front of him; instinctively they
cowered, aside and let him pass. In an instant he had jumped upon the
cart, and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great
box, and flung it over the wheel to the ground. In the meantime, Mr.
Morris had had to use force to pass through his side of the ring of
Szgany. All the time I had been breathlessly watching Jonathan I had,
with the tail of my eye, seen him pressing desperately forward, and had
seen the knives of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and
they cut at him. He had parried with his great bowie knife, and at first
I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang
beside Jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart, I could see that
with his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the blood was
spurting through his fingers. He did not delay notwithstanding this, for
as Jonathan, with desperate energy, attacked one end of the chest,
attempting to prize off the lid with his great Kukri knife, he attacked
the other frantically with his bowie. Under the efforts of both men the
lid began to yield; the nails drew with a quick screeching sound, and
the top of the box was thrown back.

By this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the Winchesters,
and at the mercy of Lord Godalming and Dr. Seward, had given in and made
no resistance. The sun was almost down on the mountain tops, and the
shadows of the whole group fell long upon the snow. I saw the Count
lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the rude falling from
the cart had scattered over him. He was deathly pale, just like a waxen
image, and the red eyes glared with the horrible vindictive look which I
knew too well.

As I looked, the eyes saw the sinking sun, and the look of hate in them
turned to triumph.

But, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of Jonathan's great knife.
I shrieked as I saw it shear through the throat; whilst at the same
moment Mr. Morris's bowie knife plunged into the heart.

It was like a miracle; but before our very eyes, and almost in the
drawing of a breath, the whole body crumble into dust and passed from
our sight.

I shall be glad as long as I live that even in that moment of final
dissolution, there was in the face a look of peace, such as I never
could have imagined might have rested there.

The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every stone
of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of the
setting sun.

The gypsies, taking us as in some way the cause of the extraordinary
disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away as
if for their lives. Those who were unmounted jumped upon the
leiter-wagon and shouted to the horsemen not to desert them. The wolves,
which had withdrawn to a safe distance, followed in their wake, leaving
us alone.

Mr. Morris, who had sunk to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding his
hand pressed to his side; the blood still gushed through his fingers. I
flew to him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the
two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his
head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble effort, my hand
in that of his own which was unstained. He must have seen the anguish of
my heart in my face, for he smiled at me and said:--

"I am only too happy to have been of any service! Oh, God!" he cried
suddenly, struggling up to a sitting posture and pointing to me, "It was
worth for this to die! Look! look!"

The sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and the red gleams
fell upon my face, so that it was bathed in rosy light. With one impulse
the men sank on their knees and a deep and earnest "Amen" broke from all
as their eyes followed the pointing of his finger. The dying man
spoke:--

"Now God be thanked that all has not been in vain! See! the snow is not
more stainless than her forehead! The curse has passed away!"

And, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a
gallant gentleman.




                                  NOTE


Seven years ago we all went through the flames; and the happiness of
some of us since then is, we think, well worth the pain we endured. It
is an added joy to Mina and to me that our boy's birthday is the same
day as that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the
secret belief that some of our brave friend's spirit has passed into
him. His bundle of names links all our little band of men together; but
we call him Quincey.

In the summer of this year we made a journey to Transylvania, and went
over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and
terrible memories. It was almost impossible to believe that the things
which we had seen with our own eyes and heard with our own ears were
living truths. Every trace of all that had been was blotted out. The
castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation.

When we got home we were talking of the old time--which we could all
look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily
married. I took the papers from the safe where they had been ever since
our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, that in all the
mass of material of which the record is composed, there is hardly one
authentic document; nothing but a mass of typewriting, except the later
note-books of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van Helsing's memorandum.
We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as
proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he said, with
our boy on his knee:--

"We want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! This boy will some day
know what a brave and gallant woman his mother is. Already he knows her
sweetness and loving care; later on he will understand how some men so
loved her, that they did dare much for her sake."

JONATHAN HARKER.

                                THE END

       *       *       *       *       *

                       _There's More to Follow!_

     More stories of the sort you like; more, probably, by the author of
     this one; more than 500 titles all told by writers of world-wide
     reputation, in the Authors' Alphabetical List which you will find
     on the _reverse side_ of the wrapper of this book. Look it over
     before you lay it aside. There are books here you are sure to
     want--some, possibly, that you have _always_ wanted.

     It is a _selected_ list; every book in it has achieved a certain
     measure of _success_.

     The Grosset & Dunlap list is not only the greatest Index of Good
     Fiction available, it represents in addition a generally accepted
     Standard of Value. It will pay you to

                _Look on the Other Side of the Wrapper!_

     _In case the wrapper is lost write to the publishers for a complete
     catalog_

       *       *       *       *       *

DETECTIVE STORIES BY J. S. FLETCHER

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list


THE SECRET OF THE BARBICAN

THE ANNEXATION SOCIETY

THE WOLVES AND THE LAMB

GREEN INK

THE KING versus WARGRAVE

THE LOST MR. LINTHWAITE

THE MILL OF MANY WINDOWS

THE HEAVEN-KISSED HILL

THE MIDDLE TEMPLE MURDER

RAVENSDENE COURT

THE RAYNER-SLADE AMALGAMATION

THE SAFETY PIN

THE SECRET WAY

THE VALLEY OF HEADSTRONG MEN

_Ask for Complete free list of G. & D. Popular Copyrighted Fiction_

GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *

Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

in a very simply way=> in a very simple way {pg 68}

"The Westminister Gazette," 25 September.=> "The Westminster Gazette,"
25 September. {pg 165}

It have told him=> She must have told him {pg 169}

from md sight=> from my sight {pg}184

Goldaming=> Godalming {pg 226}

I I did not want to hinder him=> I did not want to hinder him {pg 267}

They lay in a sort of or-orderly=> They lay in a sort of orderly {pg
279}

Translyvania=> Transylvania {pg 294}

this mrrning from Dardanelles=> this morning from Dardanelles {pg 313}







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dracula, by Bram Stoker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DRACULA ***

***** This file should be named 345-8.txt or 345-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/345/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by 
Charles Godfrey Leland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling
       Illustrated by numerous incantations, specimens of medical
       magic, anecdotes and tales

Author: Charles Godfrey Leland

Release Date: December 13, 2018 [EBook #58465]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GYPSY SORCERY AND FORTUNE TELLING ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
Gutenberg (This file was produced from images generously
made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)








                             GYPSY SORCERY
                                  AND
                            FORTUNE TELLING


                 ILLUSTRATED BY NUMEROUS INCANTATIONS,
                      SPECIMENS OF MEDICAL MAGIC,
                          ANECDOTES AND TALES

                                   BY

                         CHARLES GODFREY LELAND
             PRESIDENT OF THE GIPSY-LORE SOCIETY, &c., &c.


                  COPIOUSLY ILLUSTRATED BY THE AUTHOR


                                NEW YORK
                        CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

                                MDCCCXCI








                              DEDICATION.


                               THIS WORK
           IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED TO MY COLLEAGUES OF THE
                   CONGRÈS DES TRADITIONS POPULAIRES,
                       HELD AT PARIS, JULY, 1889;
                             AND ESPECIALLY
                  TO THE FRENCH MEMBERS OF THAT BODY,
         IN GRATEFUL REMEMBRANCE OF THEIR GENEROUS HOSPITALITY,
                AND UNFAILING KINDNESS AND COURTESY, BY
                           CHARLES G. LELAND.








CONTENTS.


    CHAP.                                                          PAGE

    I.    THE ORIGIN OF WITCHCRAFT, SHAMANISM, AND SORCERY.--
          VINDICTIVE AND MISCHIEVOUS MAGIC                            1
    II.   CHARMS AND CONJURATIONS TO CURE THE DISORDERS OF GROWN
          PEOPLE.--HUNGARIAN GYPSY MAGIC                             12
    III.  GYPSY CONJURATIONS AND EXORCISMS--THE CURE OF CHILDREN--
          HUNGARIAN GYPSY SPELLS--A CURIOUS OLD ITALIAN "SECRET"--
          THE MAGIC VIRTUE OF GARLIC--A FLORENTINE INCANTATION
          LEARNED FROM A WITCH--LILITH, THE CHILD-STEALER, AND
          QUEEN OF THE WITCHES                                       41
    IV.   SOUTH SLAVONIAN AND OTHER GYPSY WITCH-LORE.--THE WORDS
          FOR A WITCH--VILAS AND THE SPIRITS OF EARTH AND AIR--
          WITCHES, EGG-SHELLS, AND EGG-LORE--EGG PROVERBS--OVA
          DE CRUCIBUS                                                65
    V.    CHARMS OR CONJURATIONS TO CURE OR PROTECT ANIMALS          79
    VI.   OF PREGNANCY AND CHARMS, OR FOLK-LORE CONNECTED WITH
          IT--BOARS' TEETH AND CHARMS FOR PREVENTING THE FLOW
          OF BLOOD                                                  100
    VII.  THE RECOVERY OF STOLEN PROPERTY--LOVE-CHARMS--SHOES AND
          LOVE-POTIONS, OR PHILTRES                                 108
    VIII. ROUMANIAN AND TRANSYLVANIAN SORCERIES AND SUPERSTITIONS,
          CONNECTED WITH THOSE OF THE GYPSIES                       122
    IX.   THE RENDEZVOUS OR MEETINGS OF WITCHES, SORCERERS, AND
          VILAS.--A CONTINUATION OF SOUTH SLAVONIAN GYPSY-LORE      142
    X.    OF THE HAUNTS, HOMES, AND HABITS OF WITCHES IN THE
          SOUTH SLAVIC LANDS.--BOGEYS AND HUMBUGS                   152
    XI.   GYPSY WITCHCRAFT.--THE MAGICAL POWER WHICH IS INNATE
          IN ALL MEN AND WOMEN--HOW IT MAY BE CULTIVATED AND
          DEVELOPED--THE PRINCIPLES OF FORTUNE-TELLING              162
    XII.  FORTUNE-TELLING (continued).--ROMANCE BASED ON CHANCE,
          OR HOPE, AS REGARDS THE FUTURE--FOLK- AND SORCERY-LORE
          --AUTHENTIC INSTANCES OF GYPSY PREDICTION                 186
    XIII. PROVERBS REFERRING TO WITCHES, GYPSIES, AND FAIRIES       194
    XIV.  A GYPSY MAGIC SPELL.--HOKKANI BARO--LELLIN DUDIKABIN,
          OR THE GREAT SECRET--CHILDREN'S RHYMES AND INCANTATIONS
          --TEN LITTLE INDIAN BOYS AND TEN LITTLE ACORN GIRLS OF
          MARCELLUS BURDIGALENSIS                                   209
    XV.   GYPSY AMULETS                                             230
    XVI.  GYPSIES, TOADS, AND TOAD-LORE                             255








PREFACE.


This work contains a collection of the customs, usages, and ceremonies
current among gypsies, as regards fortune-telling, witch-doctoring,
love-philtering, and other sorcery, illustrated by many anecdotes and
instances, taken either from works as yet very little known to the
English reader or from personal experiences. Within a very few years,
since Ethnology and Archæology have received a great inspiration, and
much enlarged their scope through Folk-lore, everything relating to
such subjects is studied with far greater interest and to much greater
profit than was the case when they were cultivated in a languid,
half-believing, half-sceptical spirit which was in reality rather one
of mere romance than reason. Now that we seek with resolution to find
the whole truth, be it based on materialism, spiritualism, or their
identity, we are amazed to find that the realm of marvel and mystery,
of wonder and poetry, connected with what we vaguely call "magic,"
far from being explained away or exploded, enlarges before us as
we proceed, and that not into a mere cloudland, gorgeous land, but
into a country of reality in which men of science who would once have
disdained the mere thought thereof are beginning to stray. Hypnotism
has really revealed far greater wonders than were ever established by
the fascinatores of old or by mesmerists of more modern times. Memory,
the basis of thought according to Plato, which was once held to be
a determined quantity, has been proved, (the word is not too bold),
by recent physiology, to be practically infinite, and its perfect
development to be identical with that of intellect, so that we
now see plainly before us the power to perform much which was once
regarded as miraculous. Not less evident is it that men of science
or practical inventors, such as Darwin, Wallace, Huxley, Tyndale,
Galton, Joule, Lockyer, and Edison, have been or are all working in
common with theosophists, spiritualists, Folk-lorists, and many more,
not diversely but all towards a grand solution of the Unknown.

Therefore there is nothing whatever in the past relating to the
influences which have swayed man, however strange, eccentric,
superstitious, or even repulsive they may seem, which is not of great
and constantly increasing value. And if we of the present time begin
already to see this, how much more important will these facts be to the
men of the future, who, by virtue of more widely extended knowledge and
comparison, will be better able than we are to draw wise conclusions
undreamed of now. But the chief conclusion for us is to collect as
much as we can, while it is yet extant, of all the strange lore of the
olden time, instead of wasting time in forming idle theories about it.

In a paper read before the Congrès des Traditions populaires in Paris,
1889, on the relations of gypsies to Folk-lore, I set forth my belief
that these people have always been the humble priests of what is really
the practical religion of all peasants and poor people; that is their
magical ceremonies and medicine. Very few have any conception of the
degree to which gypsies have been the colporteurs of what in Italy
is called "the old faith," or witchcraft.

As regards the illustrative matter given, I am much indebted to
Dr. Wlislocki, who has probably had far more intimate personal
experience of gypsies than any other learned man who ever lived,
through our mutual friend, Dr. Anthon Herrmann, editor of the
Ethnologische Mitteilungen, Budapest, who is also himself an
accomplished Romany scholar and collector, and who has kindly taken
a warm interest in this book, and greatly aided it. To these I may
add Dr. Friedrich S. Krauss, of Vienna, whose various works on the
superstitions and Folk-lore of the South Slavonians--kindly presented
by him to me--contain a vast mine of material, nearly all that of which
he treats being common property between peasants and the Romany, as
other sources abundantly indicate. With this there is also much which
I collected personally among gypsies and fortune-tellers, and similar
characters, it being true as regards this work and its main object,
that there is much cognate or allied information which is quite as
valuable as gypsy-lore itself, as all such subjects mutually explain
one of the others.

Gypsies, as I have said, have done more than any race or class on
the face of the earth to disseminate among the multitude a belief
in fortune-telling, magical or sympathetic cures, amulets and such
small sorceries as now find a place in Folk-lore. Their women have
all pretended to possess occult power since prehistoric times. By
the exercise of their wits they have actually acquired a certain
art of reading character or even thought, which, however it be
allied to deceit, is in a way true in itself, and well worth careful
examination. Matthew Arnold has dwelt on it with rare skill in his
poem of "The Gypsy Scholar." Even deceit and imposture never held
its own as a system for ages without some ground-work of truth, and
that which upheld the structure of gypsy sorcery, has never been very
carefully examined. I trust that I have done this in a rational and
philosophic spirit, and have also illustrated my remarks in a manner
which will prove attractive to the general reader.

There are many good reasons for believing that the greatest portion of
gypsy magic was brought by the Romany from the East or India. This is
specially true as regards those now dwelling in Eastern Europe. And
it is certainly interesting to observe that among these people there
is still extant, on a very extended scale indeed, a Shamanism which
seems to have come from the same Tartar-Altaic source which was
found of yore among the Accadian-Babylonians, Etruscan races, and
Indian hill-tribes. This, the religion of the drum and the demon as a
disease--or devil doctoring--will be found fully illustrated in many
curious ways in these pages. I believe that in describing it I have
also shown how many fragments of this primitive religion, or cult,
still exist, under very different names, in the most enlightened
centres of civilization. And I respectfully submit to my reader,
or critic, that I have in no instance, either in this or any other
case, wandered from my real subject, and that the entire work forms
a carefully considered and consistent whole. To perfect my title,
I should perhaps have added a line or two to the effect that I have
illustrated many of the gypsy sorceries by instances of Folk-lore drawn
from other sources; but I believe that it is nowhere inappropriate,
considering the subject as a whole. For those who would lay stress
on omissions in my book, I would say that I have never intended or
pretended to exhaust gypsy superstitions. I have not even given all
that may be found in the works of Wlislocki alone. I have, according
to the limits of the book, cited so much as to fully illustrate the
main subject already described, and this will be of more interest to
the student of history than the details of gypsy chiromancy or more
spells and charms than are necessary to explain the leading ideas.

What is wanted in the present state of Folk-lore, I here repeat, is
collection from original sources, and material, that is from people
and not merely from books. The critics we have--like the poor--always
with us, and a century hence we shall doubtless have far better ones
than those in whom we now rejoice--or sorrow. But material abides
no time, and an immense quantity of it which is world-old perishes
every day. For with general culture and intelligence we are killing
all kinds of old faiths, with wonderful celerity. The time is near at
hand when it will all be incredibly valuable, and then men will wish
sorrowfully enough that there had been more collectors to accumulate
and fewer critics to detract from their labours and to discourage
them. For the collector must form his theory, or system great or
small, good or bad, such as it is, in order to gather his facts;
and then the theory is shattered by the critic and the collection
made to appear ridiculous. And so collection ends.

There is another very curious reflection which has been ever present
to my mind while writing this work, and which the reader will do well
carefully to think out for himself. It is that the very first efforts
of the human mind towards the supernatural were gloomy, strange, and
wild; they were of witchcraft and sorcery, dead bodies, defilement,
deviltry, and dirt. Men soon came to believe in the virtue of the
repetition of certain rhymes or spells in connection with dead men's
bones, hands, and other horrors or "relics." To this day this old
religion exists exactly as it did of yore, wherever men are ignorant,
stupid, criminal, or corresponding to their prehistoric ancestors. I
myself have seen a dead man's hand for sale in Venice. According
to Dr. Block, says a writer in The St. James's Gazette, January 16,
1889, the corpse-candle superstition is still firmly enshrined among
the tenets of thieves all over Europe. In reality, according to The
Standard, we know little about the strange thoughts which agitate the
minds of the criminal classes. Their creeds are legends. Most of them
are the children and grandchildren of thieves who have been brought
up from their youth in the densest ignorance, and who, constantly
at war with society, seek the aid of those powers of darkness in the
dread efficacy of which they have an unshaken confidence.


   "Fetishism of the rudest type, or what the mythologists have
    learned to call 'animism' is part and parcel of the robber's
    creed. A 'habit and repute' thief has always in his pocket, or
    somewhere about his person, a bit of coal, or chalk, or a 'lucky
    stone,' or an amulet of some sort on which he relies for safety
    in his hour of peril. Omens he firmly trusts in. Divination is
    regularly practised by him, as the occasional quarrels over the
    Bible and key, and the sieve and shears, testify. The supposed
    power of witches and wizards make many of them live in terror,
    and pay blackmail, and although they will lie almost without
    a motive, the ingenuity with which the most depraved criminal
    will try to evade 'kissing the book,' performing this rite with
    his thumb instead, is a curious instance of what may be termed
    perverted religious instincts. As for the fear of the evil eye, it
    is affirmed that most of the foreign thieves of London dread more
    being brought before a particular magistrate who has the reputation
    of being endowed with that fatal gift than of being summarily
    sentenced by any other whose judicial glare is less severe."


This is all true, but it tells only a small part of the truth. Not
only is Fetish or Shamanism the real religion of criminals, but of
vast numbers who are not suspected of it. There is not a town in
England or in Europe in which witchcraft (its beginning) is not
extensively practised, although this is done with a secrecy the
success of which is of itself almost a miracle. We may erect churches
and print books, but wherever the prehistoric man exists--and he is
still to be found everywhere by millions--he will cling to the old
witchcraft of his remote ancestors. Until you change his very nature,
the only form in which he can realize supernaturalism will be by means
of superstition, and the grossest superstition at that. Research and
reflection have taught me that this sorcery is far more widely and
deeply extended than any cultivated person dreams--instead of yielding
to the progress of culture it seems to actually advance with it. Count
Angelo de Gubernatis once remarked to one of the most distinguished
English statesmen that there was in the country in Tuscany ten times
as much heathenism as Christianity. The same remark was made to me
by a fortune-teller in Florence. She explained what she meant. It
was the vecchia religione--"the old religion"--not Christianity,
but the dark and strange sorceries of the stregha, or witch, the
compounding of magical medicine over which spells are muttered, the
making love-philters, the cursing enemies, the removing the influence
of other witches, and the manufacture of amulets in a manner prohibited
by the Church.

It would seem as if, by some strange process, while advanced
scientists are occupied in eliminating magic from religion, the
coarser mind is actually busy in reducing it to religion alone. It
has been educated sufficiently to perceive an analogy between dead
man's hands and "relics" as working miracles, and as sorcery is more
entertaining than religion, and has, moreover, the charm of secrecy,
the prehistoric man, who is still with us, prefers the former. Because
certain forms of this sorcery are no longer found among the educated
classes we think that superstition no longer exists; but though we
no longer burn witches or believe in fairies, it is a fact that of
a kind and fashion proportionate to our advanced culture, it is,
with a very few exceptions, as prevalent as ever. Very few persons
indeed have ever given this subject the attention which it merits,
for it is simply idle to speculate on the possibility of cultivating
or sympathizing with the lowest orders without really understanding
it in all its higher forms. And I venture to say that, as regards a
literal and truthful knowledge of its forms and practices, this work
will prove to be a contribution to the subject not without value.

I have, in fact, done my best to set forth in it a very singular truth
which is of great importance to every one who takes any real interest
in social science, or the advance of intelligence. It is that while
almost everybody who contributes to general literature, be it books
of travel or articles in journals, has ever and anon something clever
to say about superstition among the lower orders at home or abroad,
be it in remote country places or in the mountains of Italy, with the
usual cry of "Would it be believed--in the nineteenth century?" &c.;
it still remains true that the amount of belief in magic--call it by
what name we will--in the world is just as great as ever it was. And
here I would quote with approbation a passage from "The Conditions for
the Survival of Archaic Customs," by G. L. Gomme, in The Archæological
Review of January, 1890:--


   "If Folk-lore has done nothing else up to this date it has
    demonstrated that civilization, under many of its phases, while
    elevating the governing class of a nation, and thereby no doubt
    elevating the nation, does not always reach the lowest or even the
    lower strata of the population. As Sir Arthur Mitchell puts it,
    'There is always a going up of some and a going down of others,'
    and it is more than probable that just as the going up of the
    few is in one certain direction, along certain well-ascertained
    lines of improvement or development, so the going down of the
    many is in an equally well-ascertained line of degradation
    or backwardness. The upward march is always towards political
    improvement, carrying with it social development; the downward
    march is always towards social degradation, carrying with it
    political backwardness. It seems difficult indeed to believe that
    monarchs like Ælfred, Eadward, William, and Edward, could have had
    within their Christianized kingdom groups of people whose status
    was still that of savagery; it seems difficult to believe that
    Raleigh and Spenser actually beheld specimens of the Irish savage;
    it seems impossible to read Kemble and Green and Freeman and yet
    to understand that they are speaking only of the advanced guard of
    the English nation, not of the backward races within the boundary
    of its island home. The student of archaic custom has, however,
    to meet these difficulties, and it seems necessary, therefore,
    to try and arrive at some idea as to what the period of savagery
    in these islands really means."


Which is a question that very few can answer. There is to be found
in almost every cheap book, or "penny dreadful" and newspaper shop
in Great Britain and America, for sale at a very low price a Book
of Fate--or something equivalent to it, for the name of these works
is legion--and one publisher advertises that he has nearly thirty of
them, or at least such books with different titles. In my copy there
are twenty-five pages of incantations, charms, and spells, every one
of them every whit as "superstitious" as any of the gypsy ceremonies
set forth in this volume. I am convinced, from much inquiry, that next
to the Bible and the Almanac there is no one book which is so much
disseminated among the million as the fortune-teller, in some form
or other. [1] That is to say, there are, numerically, many millions
more of believers in such small sorcery now in Great Britain than
there were centuries ago, for, be it remembered, the superstitions
of the masses were always petty ones, like those of the fate-books;
it was only the aristocracy who consulted Cornelius Agrippa, and
could afford la haute magie. We may call it by other names, but fry,
boil, roast, powder or perfume it as we will, the old faith in the
supernatural and in "occult" means of getting at it still exists in one
form or another--the parable or moral of most frequent occurrence in
it being that of the Mote and the Beam, of the real and full meaning
of which I can only reply in the ever-recurring refrain of the Edda:
"Understand ye this--or what?"








CHAPTER I.

THE ORIGIN OF WITCHCRAFT, SHAMANISM, AND SORCERY.--VINDICTIVE AND
MISCHIEVOUS MAGIC.


As their peculiar perfume is the chief association with spices,
so sorcery is allied in every memory to gypsies. And as it has not
escaped many poets that there is something more strangely sweet
and mysterious in the scent of cloves than in that of flowers, so
the attribute of inherited magic power adds to the romance of these
picturesque wanderers. Both the spices and the Romany come from the
far East--the fatherland of divination and enchantment. The latter
have been traced with tolerable accuracy, if we admit their affinity
with the Indian Dom and Domar, back to the threshold of history, or
well-nigh into prehistoric times, and in all ages they, or their women,
have been engaged, as if by elvish instinct, in selling enchantments,
peddling prophecies and palmistry, and dealing with the devil generally
in a small retail way. As it was of old so it is to-day--


    Ki shan i Romani
    Adoi san' i chov'hani.

    Wherever gypsies go,
    There the witches are, we know.


It is no great problem in ethnology or anthropology as to how gypsies
became fortune-tellers. We may find a very curious illustration of
it in the wren. This is apparently as humble, modest, prosaic little
fowl as exists, and as far from mystery and wickedness as an old
hen. But the ornithologists of the olden time, and the myth-makers,
and the gypsies who lurked and lived in the forest, knew better. They
saw how this bright-eyed, strange little creature in her elvish way
slipped in and out of hollow trees and wood shade into sunlight,
and anon was gone, no man knew whither, and so they knew that it was
an uncanny creature, and told wonderful tales of its deeds in human
form, and to-day it is called by gypsies in Germany, as in England,
the witch-bird, or more briefly, chorihani, "the witch." Just so the
gypsies themselves, with their glittering Indian eyes, slipping like
the wren in and out of the shadow of the Unknown, and anon away and
invisible, won for themselves the name which now they wear. Wherever
Shamanism, or the sorcery which is based on exorcising or commanding
spirits, exists, its professors from leading strange lives, or from
solitude or wandering, become strange and wild-looking. When men have
this appearance people associate with it mysterious power. This is
the case in Tartary, Africa, among the Eskimo, Lapps, or Red Indians,
with all of whom the sorcerer, voodoo or medaolin, has the eye of
the "fascinator," glittering and cold as that of a serpent. So the
gypsies, from the mere fact of being wanderers and out-of-doors
livers in wild places, became wild-looking, and when asked if they
did not associate with the devils who dwell in the desert places,
admitted the soft impeachment, and being further questioned as to
whether their friends the devils, fairies, elves, and goblins had not
taught them how to tell the future, they pleaded guilty, and finding
that it paid well, went to work in their small way to improve their
"science," and particularly their pecuniary resources. It was an easy
calling; it required no property or properties, neither capital nor
capitol, shiners nor shrines, wherein to work the oracle. And as I
believe that a company of children left entirely to themselves would
form and grow up with a language which in a very few years would
be spoken fluently, [2] so I am certain that the shades of night,
and fear, pain, and lightning and mystery would produce in the same
time conceptions of dreaded beings, resulting first in demonology and
then in the fancied art of driving devils away. For out of my own
childish experiences and memories I retain with absolute accuracy
material enough to declare that without any aid from other people
the youthful mind forms for itself strange and seemingly supernatural
phenomena. A tree or bush waving in the night breeze by moonlight is
perhaps mistaken for a great man, the mere repetition of the sight
or of its memory make it a personal reality. Once when I was a child
powerful doses of quinine caused a peculiar throb in my ear which I
for some time believed was the sound of somebody continually walking
upstairs. Very young children sometimes imagine invisible playmates or
companions talk with them, and actually believe that the unseen talk
to them in return. I myself knew a small boy who had, as he sincerely
believed, such a companion, whom he called Bill, and when he could
not understand his lessons he consulted the mysterious William, who
explained them to him. There are children who, by the voluntary or
involuntary exercise of visual perception or volitional eye-memory,
[3] reproduce or create images which they imagine to be real, and this
faculty is much commoner than is supposed. In fact I believe that where
it exists in most remarkable degrees the adults to whom the children
describe their visions dismiss them as "fancies" or falsehoods. Even
in the very extraordinary cases recorded by Professor Hale, in which
little children formed for themselves spontaneously a language in
which they conversed fluently, neither their parents nor anybody else
appears to have taken the least interest in the matter. However, the
fact being that babes can form for themselves supernatural conceptions
and embryo mythologies, and as they always do attribute to strange
or terrible-looking persons power which the latter do not possess,
it is easy, without going further, to understand why a wild Indian
gypsy, with eyes like a demon when excited, and unearthly-looking at
his calmest, should have been supposed to be a sorcerer by credulous
child-like villagers. All of this I believe might have taken place,
or really did take place, in the very dawn of man's existence as
a rational creature--that as soon as "the frontal convolution of
the brain which monkeys do not possess," had begun with the "genial
tubercule," essential to language, to develop itself, then also certain
other convolutions and tubercules, not as yet discovered, but which
ad interim I will call "the ghost-making," began to act. "Genial,"
they certainly were not--little joy and much sorrow has man got out of
his spectro-facient apparatus--perhaps if it and talk are correlative
he might as well, many a time, have been better off if he were dumb.

So out of the earliest time, in the very two o'clock of a misty
morning in history, man came forth believing in non-existent terrors
and evils as soon as he could talk, and talking about them as fast
as he formed them. Long before the conception of anything good or
beneficent, or of a Heavenly Father or benevolent angels came to him,
he was scared with nightmares and spirits of death and darkness,
hell, hunger, torture, and terror. We all know how difficult it
is for many people when some one dies out of a house-hold to get
over the involuntary feeling that we shall unexpectedly meet the
departed in the usual haunts. In almost every family there is a
record how some one has "heard a voice they cannot hear," or the
dead speaking in the familiar tones. Hence the belief in ghosts,
as soon as men began to care for death at all, or to miss those who
had gone. So first of all came terrors and spectres, or revenants,
and from setting out food for the latter, which was the most obvious
and childlike manner to please them, grew sacrifices to evil spirits,
and finally the whole system of sacrifice in all its elaboration.

It may therefore be concluded that as soon as man began to think
and speak and fear the mysterious, he also began to appease ghosts
and bugbears by sacrifices. Then there sprung up at once--quite as
early--the magus, or the cleverer man, who had the wit to do the
sacrificing and eat the meats sacrificed, and explain that he had
arranged it all privately with the dead and the devils. He knew all
about them, and he could drive them away. This was the Shaman. He
seems to have had a Tartar-Mongol-mongrel-Turanian origin, somewhere
in Central Asia, and to have spread with his magic drum, and songs,
and stinking smoke, exorcising his fiends all over the face of the
earth, even as his descendant, General Booth, with his "devil-drivers"
is doing at the present day. But the earliest authentic records
of Shamanism are to be found in the Accadian, proto-Chaldæan and
Babylon records. According to it all diseases whatever, as well as all
disasters, were directly the work of evil spirits, which were to be
driven away by songs of exorcism, burning of perfumes or evil-smelling
drugs, and performing ceremonies, many of which, with scraps of the
exorcisms are found in familiar use here and there at the present
day. Most important of all in it was the extraordinary influence of
the Shaman himself on his patient, for he made the one acted on sleep
or wake, freed him from many apparently dire disorders in a minute,
among others of epilepsies which were believed to be caused by devils
dwelling in man--the nearest and latest explanation of which magic
power is given in that very remarkable book, "Psycho-Therapeutics, or
Treatment by Sleep and Suggestion," by C. Lloyd Tuckey, M.D. (London:
Bailliere and Co., 1889), which I commend to all persons interested
in ethnology as casting light on some of the most interesting and
perplexing problems of humanity, and especially of "magic."

It would seem, at least among the Laplanders, Finns, Eskimo, and
Red Indians, that the first stage of Shamanism was a very horrible
witchcraft, practised chiefly by women, in which attempts were made to
conciliate the evil spirits; the means employed embracing everything
which could revolt and startle barbarous men. Thus fragments of
dead bodies and poison, and unheard-of terrors and crimes formed its
basis. I think it very probable that this was the primitive religion
among savages everywhere. An immense amount of it in its vilest
conceivable forms still exists among negroes as Voodoo.

After a time this primitive witchcraft or voodooism had its
reformers--probably brave and shrewd men, who conjectured that the
powers of evil might be "exploited" to advantage. There is great
confusion and little knowledge as yet as regards primitive man, but
till we know better we may roughly assume that witch-voodooism was
the religion of the people of the paleolithic period, if they could
talk at all, since language is denied to the men of the Neanderthal,
Canstadt, Egnisheim, and Podhava type. All that we can declare with
some certainty is that we find the advanced Shamanism the religion of
the early Turanian races, among whose descendants, and other people
allied to them, it exists to this day. The grandest incident in the
history of humanity is the appearance of the Man of Cromagnon. He it
was who founded what M. de Quatrefages calls "a magnificent race,"
probably one which speedily developed a high civilization, and a
refined religion. But the old Shamanism with its amulets, exorcisms,
and smoke, its noises, more or less musical, of drums and enchanted
bells, and its main belief that all the ills of life came from the
action of evil spirits, was deeply based among the inferior races and
the inferior scions of the Cromagnon stock clung to it in forms more
or less modified. Just as the earlier witchcraft, or the worship and
conciliation of evil, overlapped in many places the newer Shamanism, so
the latter overlapped the beautiful Nature-worship of the early Aryans,
the stately monotheism of the Shemites, and the other more advanced
or ingenious developments of the idea of a creative cause. There are,
in fact, even among us now, minds to whom Shamanism or even witchcraft
is deeply, or innately adapted by nature, and there are hundred of
millions who, while professing a higher and purer doctrine, cling
to its forms or essentials, believing that because the apparatus
is called by a different name it is in no respect whatever the same
thing. Finally there are men who, with no logical belief whatever in
any kind of supernaturalism, study it, and love it, and are moved by
it, owing to its endless associations with poetry, art, and all the
legends of infancy or youth. Heine was not in his reasoning moments
anything more or less than a strict Deist or Monotheist, but all the
dreams and spectres, fairies and goblins, whether of the Middle Ages or
the Talmud, were inexpressibly dear to him, and they move like myriad
motes through the sunshine of his poetry and prose, often causing
long rays when there were bars at the window--like that on which
the saint hung his cloak. It is probable or certain that Shamanism
(or that into which it has very naturally developed) will influence
all mankind, until science, by absorbing man's love of the marvellous
in stupendous discoveries shall so put to shame the old thaumaturgy,
or wonder-working, that the latter will seem poor and childish. In
all the "Arabian Nights" there is nothing more marvellous than the
new idea that voices and sounds may be laid aside like real books,
and made to speak and sing again years afterwards. And in all of that
vast repertory of occult lore, "Isis Unveiled," there is nothing so
wonderful as the simple truth that every child may be educated to
possess an infinitely developed memory of words, sights, sounds, and
ideas, allied to incredible quickness of perception and practice of
the constructive faculties. These, with the vast fields of adjusting
improved social relations and reforms--all of which in a certain way
opens dazzling vistas of a certain kind of enchantment or brilliant
hope--will go fast and far to change the old romance to a radically
different state of feeling and association.

It is coming--let it come! Doubtless there was an awful romance
of darkness about the old witchcraft which caused its worshippers
to declare that the new lights of Shamanism could never dissipate
it. Just so many millions of educated people at present cannot be
brought to understand that all things to which they are used are not
based on immutable laws of nature, and must needs be eternal. They will
find it hard to comprehend that there can ever be any kind of poetry,
art, or sentiment, utterly different from that to which they and their
ancestors have been accustomed. Yet it is clear and plain before them,
this New Era, looking them directly in the face, about to usher in a
reformation compared to which all the reformations and revolutions,
and new religions which the world has ever seen were as nothing;
and the children are born who will see more than the beginning of it.

In the next chapter I will examine the Shamanic spells and charms
still used among certain gypsies. For, be it observed, all the gypsy
magic and sorcery here described is purely Shamanic--that is to say,
of the most primitive Tartar type--and it is the more interesting
as having preserved from prehistoric times many of the most marked
characteristics of the world's first magic or religion. It treats
every disease, disorder, trouble, or affliction as the work of an
evil spirit; it attempts to banish these influences by the aid of
ceremonies, many of which, by the disgusting and singular nature
of the ingredients employed, show the lingering influences of the
black witchcraft which preceded Shamanism; and it invokes favourable
supernatural agencies, such as the spirits of the air and Mashmurdalo',
the giant of the forests. In addition to this there will be found to
be clearly and unmistakably associated with all their usages, symbols
and things nearly connected with much which is to be found in Greek,
Roman, and Indian mythology or symbolism. Now whether this was drawn
from "classic" sources, or whether all came from some ancient and
obscure origin, cannot now be accurately determined. But it certainly
cannot be denied that Folk-lore of this kind casts a great deal of
light on the early history of mankind, and the gradual unfolding or
evolution of religion and of mind, and that, if intelligently studied,
this of the gypsies is as important as any chapter in the grand work.

The gypsies came, historically speaking, very recently from India. It
has not been so carefully observed as it might that all Indians are
not of the religion of Brahma, much less of Buddha or of Mahommed,
and that among the lower castes, the primæval Altaic Shamanism, with
even earlier witchcraft, still holds its own. Witchcraft, or Voodoo,
or Obi, relies greatly on poisoning for its magic, and the first
gypsies were said to poison unscrupulously. Even to this day there
is but one word with them as with many Hindoos for both medicine and
poison--id est drab. How exactly this form of witchcraft and Shamanism
exists to-day in India appears from the following extract from The
St. James's Gazette, September 8, 1888:--


    THE HINDOO PRIEST.

    In India, the jadoo-wallah, or exorcist, thrives apace; and
    no wonder, for is not the lower-caste Hindoo community bhut,
    or demon-ridden? Every village, graveyard, burning-ghat, has
    its special bhut or bhuts; and the jadoo-wallah is the earthly
    mediator between their bhutships and the common folk. The exorcist
    is usually the spiritual adviser to the population of a low-caste
    village, and is known as a gooroo, or priest: that is to say, he
    professes to hold commune with the spirits of defunct Hindoos which
    have qualified for their unique position in the other world--by
    their iniquity in this one, perhaps. Every Hindoo has a guardian
    bhut that requires propitiating, and the gooroo is the medium.

    Amongst the Jaiswars and other low-caste Hindoos, caste is
    regulated by carnal pice, and a man is distinguished amongst
    them by a regulated monetary scale. One person may be a 14-anna
    caste man while another may only be a 12-anna caste man. Does the
    12-anna caste man wish to supersede the 14-anna caste man, then
    he consults the gooroo, who will, in consideration of a certain
    contribution, promote him to a higher-caste grade. A moneyed man
    having qualms about his future state should join the Jaiswars,
    where at least he would have an opportunity of utilizing his spare
    cash for the good of his soul. The average gooroo will be only too
    glad to procure him everlasting glory for a matter of a few rupees.

    The gooroo, then, serves as regulator of the lower-caste Hindoo
    system. But it is our intention to exhibit him in his peculiar
    position of exorcist-general to the people. This will perhaps
    be best explained by an account of the case of one Kaloo. Kaloo
    was a grass-cutter, and had been offended by Kasi, a brother
    grass-cutter. Kasi, it appears, had stolen Kaloo's quilt one night
    during his temporary absence at a neighbouring liquor-shop. Kaloo,
    on his return, finding his quilt gone, raised the hue-and-cry;
    and Mooloo, the village policeman, traced the robbery to Kasi's
    hut. Yet, in spite of this damning proof, the village panchayet,
    or bench of magistrates, decided that, as Kaloo could not swear
    to the exact colour of his lost quilt--Kaloo was colour-blind--it
    could not possibly be his. Anyhow, Kaloo kept Kasi in view and
    hit upon a plan to do him a grievous bodily injury. Scraping
    together a few rupees, he went to the village gooroo and promised
    that worthy a reward if he would only exorcise the bhuts and get
    them to "make Kasi's liver bad." The gooroo, in consideration
    of five rupees cash, promised compliance. So that night we find
    the gooroo busy with sandal-wood and pig's blood propitiating the
    neighbouring bhuts. Needless to say that Kasi had in a very short
    space of time all the symptoms of liver complaint. Whether the
    bhuts gave Kasi a bad liver or the gooroo gave him a few doses
    of poison is a question. Anyhow, Kasi soon died. Another case
    in point is that of Akuti. Akuti was a retired courtesan who had
    long plied a profitable trade in the city. We find her, however,
    at her native village of Ramghur, the wife of one Balu. Balu
    soon got tired of his Akuti, and longed for the contents of her
    strong box wherein she kept her rupees, bracelets, nose-rings,
    and other valuables. This was a rather awkward matter for Balu,
    for Akuti was still in the prime of life. Balu accordingly visits
    the gooroo and wants Akuti's liver made bad. "Nothing easier,"
    says the gooroo: "five rupees." Balu has reckoned without his
    host, however: for the gooroo, as general spiritual adviser to
    the Ramghur community, visits Akuti and tells her of Balu's little
    scheme. Naturally Balu's liver is soon in a decline, for Akuti's
    ten rupees were put in the opposite side of the gooroo's scales.

    Knaves of the gooroo genus flourish in India, and when their
    disposition is vicious the damage they can do is appalling. That
    these priests exist and do such things as I have illustrated is
    beyond question. Ask any native of India his views on the bhut
    question, and he will tell you that there are such things, and,
    further, that the gooroo is the only one able to lay them, so to
    speak. According to the low-caste Hindoo, the bhut is a spiteful
    creature which requires constant supplies of liquor and pork;
    otherwise it will wreak its vengeance on the forgetful votary who
    neglects the supply. A strange idea, too, is this of pork being
    pleasing to the bhuts; but when it is remembered that the Jaiswars,
    Chamars, and other low-caste Hindoos are inordinately fond of
    that meat themselves, they are right in supposing pig to be the
    favourite dish of the bhuts, who, after all, are but the departed
    spirits of their own people. Naturally bhai (brother) Kaloo, or
    bahin (sister, English gypsy pen) Akuti, the quondam grass-cutter
    and courtesan of Ramghur village, who in this life liked nothing
    better than a piece of bacon and a dram of spirits, will, in their
    state of bhuthood hanker after those things still. Acting on these
    notions of the people, the gooroo lives and thrives exceedingly.


Yet of all this there is nothing "Hindoo," nothing of the Vedas. It is
all pre-Aryan, devil-worshipping, poisoning, and Turanian; and it is
exactly like voodooing in Philadelphia or any other city in America. It
is the old faith which came before all, which existed through and
under Brahminism, Buddhism, and Mahommedanism, and which, as is well
known, has cropped out again and flourishes vigorously under British
toleration. And this is the faith which forms the basis of European
gypsy sorcery, as it did of yore that of the Chaldæan and Etrurian,
which still survive in the witchcraft of the Tuscan Romagna. Every
gypsy who came to Europe a few centuries ago set up as a gooroo,
and did his sorceries after the same antique fashion. Even to-day it
is much the same, but with far less crime. But the bhut or malignant
spirit is, under other names, still believed in, still doctored by
gypsies with herbs and smoke, and "be-rhymed like an Irish rat,"
and conjured into holes bored in trees, and wafted away into running
streams, and naïvely implored to "go where he is wanted," to where
he was nursed, and to no longer bother honest folk who are tired
of him. And for all this the confiding villager must pay the gypsy
wise-woman "so much monies"--as it was in the beginning and is now in
good faith among millions in Europe who are in a much better class
of society. And from this point of view I venture to say that there
is not a charm or spell set down in this work or extant which will
not be deeply interesting to every sincere student of the history of
culture. Let me, however, say in this beginning once for all that
I have only given specimens sufficient to illustrate my views, for
my prescribed limits quite forbid the introduction of all the gypsy
cures, spells, &c., which I have collected.








CHAPTER II.

CHARMS AND CONJURATIONS TO CURE THE DISORDERS OF GROWN
PEOPLE. HUNGARIAN GYPSY MAGIC.


Though not liable to many disorders, the gypsies in Eastern Europe,
from their wandering, out-of-doors life, and camping by marshes and
pools where there is malaria, suffer a great deal from fevers, which in
their simple system of medicine are divided into the shilale--i.e.,
chills or cold--and the tate shilalyi, "hot-cold," or fever and
ague. For the former, the following remedy is applied: Three lungs
and three livers of frogs are dried and powdered and drunk in spirits,
after which the sick man or woman says:--


   "Cuckerdya pal m're per
    Cáven save miseçe!
    Cuckerdya pal m're per
    Den miseçeske drom odry prejiál!"

   "Frogs in my belly
    Devour what is bad!
    Frogs in my belly
    Show the evil the way out!"


By "the evil" is understood evil spirits. According to the old
Shamanic belief, which was the primæval religion of all mankind,
every disease is caused by an evil spirit which enters the body
and can only be driven out by magic. We have abundant traces of
this left in our highest civilization and religion among people who
gravely attribute every evil to the devil instead of the unavoidable
antagonisms of nature. Nothing is more apparent in the New Testament
than that all diseases were anciently regarded as coming from devils,
or evil occult, spiritual influences, their negative or cure being
holiness in some form. This the Jews, if they did not learn it from
the Assyrians in the first place, had certainly studied deeply in
Babylon, where it formed the great national cult. "It was the devil
put it into my head," says the criminal; and there is not a point of
this old sorcery which is not earnestly and seriously advocated by the
Roman Catholic Church and the preachers of the Salvation Army. Among
the American Red Indians the idea of evil spirits is carried to
logical extremes. If a pen drops from our fingers, or a penny rolls
from our grasp, the former of course falls on our new white dress,
while the latter nine times out of ten goes directly to the nearest
grating, or crack or rat-hole. I aver that it is literally true,
if I ever search for a letter or paper it is almost always at the
bottom of the rest, while ink-wipers and pens seem to be endowed
with more than mere instinct or reason--they manifest genius in
concealing themselves. The Indians having observed this have come
to the conclusion that it is all the work of certain busy little
mischievous goblins, in which I, to a certain extent, agree with them,
holding, however, that the dwelling-place of these devilkins, is in
our own brain. What are our dreams but the action of our other mind,
or a second Me in my brain? Certainly it is with no will or effort,
or act of mine, that I go through a diabolical torturing nightmare,
or a dreadful dream, whose elaborate and subtle construction betrays
very often more ingenuity than I in my waking hours possess. I have had
philosophical and literary dreams, the outlines of which I have often
remembered waking, which far transcended anything of the kind which I
could ever hope to write. The maker of all this is not I or my will,
and he is never about, or on hand, when I am self-conscious. But in the
inadvertent moments of oblivion, while writing, or while performing
any act, this other I, or I's, (for there may be a multitude of them
for aught I know) step in and tease--even as they do in dreams. Now
the distinction between this of subjective demons acting objectively,
and objective or outside spirits, is really too fine to be seen even
by a Darwinian-Carpenterian-Häeckelite, and therefore one need not
be amazed that Piel Sabadis or Tomaquah, of the Passamaquoddy tribe,
or Obeah Gumbo of New Orleans, should, with these experiences, jump at
ghosts and "gobblers," is not to be wondered at; still less that they
should do something to conciliate or compel these haunting terrors,
or "buggs," as they were once called--whence bogeys. It is a fact
that if one's ink-wipers get into the habit of hiding all we have
to do is to deliberately destroy them and get others, or at least
watch them carefully, and they will soon be cured of wandering. On
the other hand, sacrifices to conciliate and please naturally occur,
and the more expensive these are the better are they supposed to
be. And as human beings were of old the most valuable property, they
were as naturally supposed to be most acceptable to the gods, or,
by the monotheists, to God. A West Indian voodoo on being reproached
for human sacrifices to the serpent, and for eating the bodies slain,
replied, "Do you believe that the Son of God was sacrificed to save
man, and do you not eat what your priests say is His very body?" So
difficult is it to draw distinctions between that which is spiritual
and the mockeries which appear to be such!

The scape-goat, or sufferer, who is martyred that many may escape--or
in other words, the unfortunate minority--is a natural result
of sacrifice. There is a curious trace of it in Hungarian Gypsy
Shamanism. On Easter Monday they make a wooden box or receptacle
which is called the bicápen, pronounced like the English gypsy word
bitchapen and meaning the same, that is--a sending, a thing sent or
gift. In this, at the bottom, are two sticks across, "as in a cradle,"
and on these are laid herbs and other fetish stuff which every one
touches with the finger; then the whole is enveloped in a winding
of white and red wool, and carried by the oldest person of the tribe
from tent to tent; after which it is borne to the next running stream
and left there, after every one has spat upon it. By doing this they
think that all the diseases and disorders which would have befallen
them during the coming year are conjured into the box. But woe to
him who shall find the box and open it, instead of throwing it at
once into the stream! All the diseases exorcised by the gypsy band
will fall upon him and his in full measure.

It would be an interesting question to know how many good people there
are, let us say in London, who, if they had an opportunity to work off
all their colds, gouts, scarlet-fevers, tooth- head- and stomach-aches,
with the consequent doctors' bills, or all suffering and expenses,
on some other family by means of secret sorcery, would or would
not "try it on"? It is curious to observe the resemblance of the
gypsy ceremony, with its box full of mischief, and the Jewish goat;
not forgetting the red wool handed down from heathen sacrifice and
sorcery of old. In the Bible white wool is the symbol of purification
(Isaiah i. 18). The feet of the statues of the gods were enveloped in
wool--Dü laneos habent pedes--to signify that they are slow to avenge,
if sure. It is altogether an interesting object, this gypsy casket,
and one would like to know what all the channels were through which
the magic ran ere it came to them.

Another cure against the fever is to go to a running stream and cast
pieces of wood nine times backwards into the running water, repeating
the rhymes:--


   "Shilályi prejiá,
    Páñori me tut 'dáv!
    Náñi me tut kámáv;
    Andakode prejiá,
    Odoy tut cuciden,
    Odoy tut ferinen,
    Odoy tut may kámen!
    Mashurdalo sástyár!"

   "Fever go away from me,
    I give it, water, unto thee!
    Unto me thou art not dear,
    Therefore go away from here
    To where they nursed thee,
    Where they shelter thee,
    Where they love thee,
      Mashurdalo--help!"


This is a very remarkable invocation which takes us into true
heathenism. Mashurdálo, or, correctly speaking, Mashmurdálo (it would
be Masmérdo in English gypsy), means meat-killer. He is a sylvan
giant--he has his hold by wode and wolde as outlawes wont to do,
in far-away forests and lonely rocky places, where he lurks to catch
beast and men in order to devour them. It is needless to say to those
who are aware that the taste of white people's flesh is like that of
very superior chicken, and a negro's something much better than grouse,
that Mashmurdálo prefers, like a simple, unsophisticated savage as
he is, men to animals. Like the German peasant who remarked, "It's
all meat, anyhow," when he found a mouse in his soup, Mashmurdálo
is not particular. He is the guardian of great treasures; like most
men in the "advance business" he knows where the "money" is to be
found--unlike them he is remarkably stupid, and can be easily cheated
of his valuables. But if anybody does this Morgante a service he is
very grateful, and aids his benefactor either with a loan or with his
enormous strength. In many respects he bears a remarkable resemblance
to two giants in the American Algonkin mythology, especially to
At-was-kenni ges--the Spirit of the Forest--who is equally powerful,
good-natured, and stupid, and to the Chenoo, who is a cannibal giant
and yet grateful to friends, and also to several Hindoo gods. The
gypsies have here evidently fused several Oriental beings into
one. This is a process which occurs in the decline of mythologies as
in languages. In the infancy of a speech, as in its old age, many
words expressing different ideas, but which sound somewhat alike,
become a single term. In English gypsy I have found as many as eight
or ten Hindi words thus concentrated into one.

Another cure for a fever. The sufferer goes in the forest and finds
a young tree. When the first rays of the rising sun fall on it the
patient shakes it with all his might and exclaims:--


   "Shilályi, shilályi prejia
    Káthe tu beshá, káthe tu beshá!"

   "Fever, fever, go away!
    Here shalt thou stay. Here shalt thou stay!"


It is here plain that the shaking the sapling is intended to transfer
the shakes, as the chill and shuddering of the fever is called in
America, to the tree.

"Then the fever passes into the tree." Perhaps it was in this way
that the aspen learned to tremble. But among the gypsies in the south
of Hungary, among whom the vaccination or inoculation of trees is
greatly the fashion, a hole is bored into the wood, into which the
patient spits thrice, repeats the spell, and then stops the hole with
a plug. The boring of holes in trees or transferring illness to them
is also practised without formulas of speech. Thus, if while a man is
lying down or sitting in the spring he hears the song of the cuckoo
he believes that he will be ill all the time for a year to come,
especially with fevers, unless he goes nine times to a tree, bores a
hole in it, and spits into it three times. Then he is safe. In German
mythology "the cuckoo is a bird which brings bad luck" (Friedrich),
and the inhabitants of Haiterbach were so persuaded of this that they
introduced a prayer against it into their church service, whence they
got the name of cuckoos (Wolf, "Zeitschrift für Deutsche Myth.,"
vol. i. p. 440). It announces to men the infidelity of wives, and
tells listeners how many years they have to live.

It is possible that this is a relic of an old form of sacrifice, or
proof that the idea occurs to all men of thus making a casket of a
tree. The occasional discovery of stone axe-heads in very old trees
in America renders this probable. And where the wood grows up and
encloses the object it would very rarely happen that it would ever
be discovered. It should be added to the previous instance that when
they have closed the hole, the Transylvanian gypsies eat some of the
bark of the next tree.

Another cure for fever is effected by going in the morning before
sunrise to the bank of a stream, and digging a hole with some
object--for instance, a knife--which has never been used. Into this
hole the patient makes water, then fills up the hole, saying:--


   "Shilályi ác kathe
    Ná ává kiyá mánge!
    Sutyárá andré cik!
    Avá kiyá mánge
    Káná káthe ná hin páñi!"

   "Fever stay here!
    Do not come to me!
    Dry up in dust,
    Come unto me
    When no water is here."


Dr. Wlislocki translates this last line, "When there is no more water
in the river," which is certainly what is meant. "While water runs
or grass grows," &c. is a formula common to all countries. Another
cure for fever is this: the patient must take a kreutzer, an egg, and
a handful of salt, and before sunrise go with them to a cross-road,
throw them away backwards, and repeat:--


   "Káná ádálá kiyá mánge áven
    Ava tu kiya mánge shilályi."

   "When these things again I see,
    Fever then return to me."


Or literally, "When these things to me come." For the next three
days the invalid must not touch money, eggs, or salt. There is an old
MS. collection of English charms and ceremonies, professedly of "black
witchcraft," in which we are told that if a girl will walk stark-naked
by the light of the full moon round a field or a house, and cast behind
her at every step a handful of salt, she will get the lover whom she
desires. Salt, says Moresinus, was sacred to the infernal deities,
and it was a symbol of the soul, or of life, because it preserved
the body while in it (Pitiscus, "Leg. Ant. Rom." ii. p. 675). The
devil never eats salt. Once there was in Germany a peasant who had
a witch for a wife, and the devil invited them to supper. But all
the dishes were without any seasoning, and the peasant, despite all
nudges and hints to hold his tongue kept crying for salt. And when it
was brought and he said, "Thank God, here is salt at last!" the whole
Spuck, or ghastly scene, vanished (Horst, "Dæmonomagie," Frankfurt,
1818, vol. ii. p. 213). For a great deal of further information
and symbolism on and of salt, including all the views of the ancient
Rabbis and modern rationalists on the subject of Lot's wife, the reader
may consult "Symbolik und Mythologie der Natur," by J. B. Friedrich,
Würzburg, 1859: "Salt is put into love-philtres and charms to ensure
the duration of an attachment; in some Eastern countries it is carried
in a little bag as an amulet to preserve health."

Another cure for fever. The patient must drink, from a new jug, water
from three brooks, and after every drink throw into the running stream
a handful of salt. Then he must make water into the first and say:--


   "Káthe hin t'ro sherro!"

   "Here is thy head!"


At the second he repeats the sacred ceremony and murmurs:--


   "Káthe hin t'ro perá!"

   "Here is thy belly!"


And again at the third he exclaims:--


   "Te kathehin t're punrá.
    Já átunci ándre páñi!"

   "And here are thy feet.
    Go now into the water!"


But while passing from one stream to another he must not look back
once, for then he might behold the dread demon of the fever which
follows him, neither must he open his mouth, except while uttering the
charm, for then the fever would at once enter his body again through
the portal thus left unclosed. This walking on in apprehension of
beholding the ugly spectre will recall to the reader a passage in the
"Ancient Mariner," of the man who walks in fear and dread,


   "Nor turns around his head,
    For well he knows a frightful fiend
    Doth close behind him tread."


The wise wives among the gypsies in Hungary have many kinds of
miraculous salves for sale to cure different disorders. These they
declare are made from the fat of dogs, bears, wolves, frogs, and the
like. As in all fetish remedies they are said to be of strange or
revolting materials, like those used by Canidia of yore, the witches
of Shakespeare and Ben Jonson, and of Burns in Tam O'Shanter.

When a man has been "struck by a spirit" there results a sore, swelling
or boil, which is cured by a sorceress as follows: The patient is put
into a tent by himself, and is given divers drinks by his attendant;
then she rubs the sufferer with a salve, the secret of which is known
only to her, while she chants:--


   "Prejiá, prejiá, prejiá,
    Kiyá miseçeske, ác odoy;
    Trianda sapa the çaven tut,
    Trianda jiuklá tut cingeren,
    Trianda káçná tut cunáven!"

   "Begone, begone, begone
    To the Evil One; stay there.
    May thirty snakes devour thee,
    Thirty dogs tear thee,
    Thirty cocks swallow thee!"


After this she slaughters a black hen, splits it open, and lays it
on the boil. Then the sufferer must drink water from three springs
or rivulets, and throw wood nine times into the fire daily until
he is well. But black hens cost money, according to Wlislocki;
albeit the gypsies, like the children of the Mist in "Waverley,"
are believed to be acquainted with a far more economical and direct
method of obtaining such commodities. Therefore this expensive and
high-class cure is not often resorted to, and when it is the sorceress
generally substitutes something cheaper than poultry. It may be here
observed that the black hen occurs frequently in mediæval witch-lore
and legend as a demon-symbol (Wolf, "Niederländische Sagen," pp. 647,
650). Thus the bones of sorcerors turn into black hens and chickens,
and it is well if your black hen dies, for if she had not you would
have perished in her place. Black hens were walled up in castles
as sacrifices to the devil, that the walls might long endure; hence
the same fowl occurs in the arms of the family of Henneberg (Nork,
"Mythologie der Volkssagen," p. 381). The lore on this subject is
very extensive.

The following remedy against headache is in general use among
Transylvanian gypsies. The patient's head is rubbed, and then washed,
with vinegar or hot water while the following charm is repeated:--


   "Oh duk ándro m'ro shero
    The o dád miseçescro,
    Adá dikhel ákáná,
    Man tu máy dostá, márdyás,
    Miro shero tu márdyás!
    Tu ná ac tu ándre me.
    Já tu, já tu, já kere.
    Káy tu miseç cucides,
    Odoy, odoy sikoves!
    Ko jál pro m'ro ushályin,
    Adáleske e duk hin!"

   "Oh, pain in my head,
    The father of all evil,
    Look upon thee now!
    Thou hast greatly pained me,
    Thou tormentest my head,
    Remain not in me!
    Go thou, go thou, go home,
    Whence thou, Evil One, didst suck,
    Thither, thither hasten!
    Who treads upon my shadow,
    To him be the pain!"


It will be seen that the principle of treading on the tail of the
coat practised in Ireland is much outdone by the gypsies who give a
headache to any one who so much as treads on their shadows. And it
is not difficult to understand that, as with children, the rubbing
the head, the bathing it with warm water or vinegar, and, finally,
the singing a soothing song, may all conduce to a cure. The readers of
"Helen's Babies" will remember the cures habitually wrought on Budge
by singing to him, "Charley boy one day." Gypsies are in many respects
mere children, or little Budges. There can be no doubt that where
faith is very strong, and imagination is lively, cures which seem to
border on the miraculous are often effected--and this is, indeed, the
basis of all miracle as applied to relieving bodily afflictions. All
of this may be, if not as yet fully explained by physiology, at least
shown to probably rest on a material basis. But no sound system of
cure can be founded on it, because there is never any certainty,
especially for difficult and serious disorders, that they can ever be
healed twice in succession. The "faith" exacted is sometimes a purely
hereditary gift, at other times merely a form of blind ignorance and
credulity. It may vividly influence all the body, and it may fail to
act altogether. But the "Faith Healer" and "Christian Scientist," or
"Metaphysical Doctor," push boldly on, and when they here and there
heal a patient once, it is published to the four winds as a proof
of invariable infallibility. And as everybody believes that he has
"faith," so he hopes to be cured. In popular custom for a man to say
he believes in anything, and to be sure that he really has nothing
against it, constitutes as much "faith" as most men understand. A
man may be utterly destitute of any moral principle and yet live in
a constant state of "faith" and pious conviction. Here the capacity
for cure by means of charms is complete.

In connection with these charms for the head we may find not less
interesting those in reference to the hair, as given by the same
authority, Dr. von Wlislocki. The greatest pains are taken to ensure
even for the new-born child what is called a full head, because every
one who dies bald is turned into a fish, and must remain in this form
till he has collected as many hairs as would make an ordinary wig. But
this lasts a long time, since he can find but a single hair every
month or moon. The moon is in many ways connected in gypsy faith with
the hair. He who sleeps bare-headed in its light will lose his hair,
or else it will become white. To have a heavy growth a man must scoop
up with his left hand water from a running brook, against the current,
and pour it on his head.

Immediately after the first bathing of a newly-born child, and its
anointing, its forehead and neck are marked with a semicircle--perhaps
meant to indicate the moon--made with a salve called barcali, intended
to promote the growth of the hair. A brew, or mess, is made from
beans and the blood of a cow. Hairs are taken from the heads of the
father and mother, which hairs are burnt to a powder and mixed with
the brew. It is remarkable that the beans are only used for a boy,
their object being to insure for him great virile or sexual power. "The
bean," says Friedrich ("Sym. d. N."), "is an erotic symbol, or one
signifying sexual pleasure." Hence it was forbidden to the Egyptian
priests, the Pythagoreans, the priests of Jupiter in Rome, and to the
Jewish high priests on certain festivals. But if the child is a girl,
the seeds of the pumpkin or sunflower are substituted for beans,
because the latter would make her barren.

It is an old belief, and one widely spread, that if the witches or the
devil can get a lock of anybody's hair, they can work him evil. The
gypsies have the following articles of faith as regards hairs:--

Should birds find any, and build them into their nests, the man who
lost them will suffer from headaches until, during the wane of the
moon, he rubs his head with the yolk of eggs and washes it clean in
running water. It would be very curious if this method of cleaning the
hair and giving it a soft gloss, so much in vogue among English ladies,
should have originated in sorcery. Beyond this, the sufferer must
mix some of his hairs with food and give them to a white dog to eat.

If hairs which have fallen or been cut away are found by a snake and
carried into its hole, the man from whom they came will continue to
lose more until those in the snake's nest are quite decayed.

If you see human hairs in the road do not tread on them, since, in that
case, if they came from a lunatic, you, too, will go mad. According
to Marcellus Burdigalensis, if you pick up some hairs in the road
just before entering a city gate, tie one to your own head, and,
throwing the rest away, walk on without looking behind you, you can
cure a headache. I have found nearly the same charm for the same
purpose in Florence, but accompanied by the incantation which is
wanting in Marcellus. Also his cure for headache with ivy from the
head of a statue, which is still used in Tuscany with the incantation
which the Roman omits.

Finding a hair hanging to your coat, carefully burn it, since you
may by so doing escape injury by witchcraft. And we may remark in
confirmation of this, that when you see a long hair on a man's coat
it is an almost certain sign that he has been among the witches,
or is bewitched; as the Countess thought when she found one clinging
to the button of her lover, Von Adelstein, as set forth in "Meister
Karl's Sketch-book."

But to bewitch your enemy get some of his combed-out hair, steep it
in your own water, and then throw it on his garments. Then he will
have no rest by night or day. I have observed that in all the Tuscan
charms intended to torment a foe, the objects employed are like this
of a disgusting nature.

If a wife will hold her husband to her in love, she must take of
her own hair and bind it to his. This must be done three times by
full moonlight.

Or if a maid will win the love of a young man, she must take of her
own hair, mix it with earth from his footsteps--"und mischt diese mit
dem Speichel einer läufigen Hundinn auf"--burn the whole to powder,
and so manage that the victim shall eat it--which, it is needless
to say, it is not likely that he will do, knowing what it is. Earth
from the footsteps of any one is regarded as a very powerful means
of bewitching him in Italian and ancient sorcery.

If a man bind the combings of his hair to the mane of a strange horse
it will be wild and shy till the hairs are removed.

For easy childbirth red hair is sewed in a small bag and carried on
the belly next the skin during pregnancy. Red hair indicates good
luck, and is called bálá kámeskro, or sun-hairs, which indicates its
Indian origin.

If any one dreams much of the dead, let him sew some of his hair into
an old shoe, and give it to any beggar. Thereby he will prevent evil
spirits from annoying him.

If a child suffers from sleeplessness, some of its mother's hair
should be sewed into its wrappings, and others pulverized, mixed
with a decoction of elderberries, be given it to drink. In German
Folk-lore, as I shall show more fully anon, the elder often occurs
as a plant specially identified with sorcery. In gypsy it is called
yakori bengeskro, or the devil's eye, from its berries.

Nails cut on Friday should be burned, and the ashes mingled with
the fodder of cattle, who are thus ensured against being stolen or
attacked by wild beasts. If children are dwarfish, the same ashes
in their food will make them grow. If a child suffers from pains in
the stomach, a bit of nail must be clipped from its every finger;
this is mixed with the dried dung of a foal, and the patient exposed
to the smoke while it is burned.

A child's first tooth must, when it falls out, be thrown into a hollow
tree. Those which come out in the seventh year are carefully kept, and
whenever the child suffers from toothache, one is thrown into a stream.

Teeth which have been buried for many years, serve to make a singular
fetish. They are mingled with the bones of a tree-frog, and the whole
then sewed up in a little bag. If a man has anything for sale, and will
draw or rub this bag over it, he will have many offers or customers
for the articles thus enchanted. The bones are prepared by putting
the frog into a glass or earthen receptacle full of small holes. This
is buried in an ant-hill. The ants enter the holes and eat away all
the flesh, leaving the bones which after a few weeks are removed. [4]

To bear healthy and strong children women wear a string of bears'
claws and children's teeth. Dr. von Wlislocki cites, apropos of this,
a passage from Jacobus Rueff, "Von Empfengnussen": "Etlich schwanger
wyber pflägend einen bären klauen von einem bären tapen yngefaszet am
hals zuo tragen" (Some women when with child are accustomed to wear
mounted bears' claws on their necks). In like manner boars' teeth,
which much resemble them, are still very commonly worn in Austria
and Italy and almost over all Europe and the East. It is but a few
days since I here, in Florence, met with a young English lady who
had bought a very large one mounted in silver as a brooch, but who
was utterly unaware that there was any meaning attached to it. [5]
I have a very ancient bear's tooth and whistle in silver, meant for
a teething child. It came from Munich.

Pain in the eyes is cured with a wash made of spring or well water
and saffron. During the application the following is recited:--


   "Oh dukh ándrál yákhá
    Já ándré páñi
    Já andrál páñi
    André safráne
    André pçuv.
    Já andrál pçuv
    Kiyá Pçuvusheske.--
    Odoy hin cerçá,
    Odoy ja te ça."

   "Oh, pain from the eyes
    Go into the water,
    Go out of the water
    Into the saffron,
    Go out of the saffron
    Into the earth.
    To the Earth-Spirit.
    There's thy home.
    There go and eat."


This incantation casts light upon the earliest Shamanic remedies. When
it was discovered that certain herbs really possessed curative
qualities, this was attributed to inherent magic virtues. The increase
of their power by combining them with water, or mingling them, was due
to mystic affinities by which a spirit passed from one to another. The
Spirit of Earth went into saffron, that of saffron into water. The
magician thus by a song sent the pain into its medical affinity, and
so on back to the source whence it came. From early times saffron,
as one of the earliest flowers of spring, owing to its colour, was
consecrated to magic and love. Eos, the goddess of the Aurora, was
called krokotieplos, the one with the saffron garment. Therefore the
public women wore a yellow robe. Even in Christian symbolism it meant
love, as Portalis declares: "In the Christian religion the colours
saffron and orange were the symbols of God embracing the heart and
illuminating the souls of the faithful" ("Des Couleurs Symboliques,"
Paris, 1837, p. 240). So we can trace the chain from the prehistoric
barbarous Shamanism, preserved by the gypsies, to the Greek, and from
the Greek to the mediæval form still existent.

The same sympathetic process of transmission may be traced in the
remedy for the erysipelas. The blood of a bullfinch is put into a new
vessel with scraped elder-bark, and then laid on a cloth with which
the eyes are bound up overnight. Meanwhile the patient repeats:--


   "Duy yákhá hin mánge
    Duy punrá hin mánge
    Dukh ándrál yákhá
    Já ándre punrá
    Já ándrál punrá.
    Já ándre pçuv,
    Já ándrál pçuv
    Andro meriben!"

   "I have two eyes,
    I have two feet,
    Pain from my eyes
    Go into my feet!
    Go from my feet,
    Go into the earth!
    Go from the earth
    Into death!"


We have here in the elder-bark associations of magic which are
ancient and widely spread, and which still exist; for at the present
day country people in New England attribute to it curative virtues
which it really does not possess. From the earliest times among the
Northern races the Lady Elder, as we may learn from the Edda, or
Fin Magnusen ("Priscæ veterum Borealium Mythologiæ Lexicon," pp. 21,
239), and Nyerup ("Worterbuch der Scandinavischen Mythologie"), had
an unearthly, ghostly reputation. Growing in lonely, gloomy places
its form and the smell of its flowers seemed repulsive, so that it was
associated with death, and some derived its name from Frau Holle, the
sorceress and goddess of death. But Schwenki ("Mythologie der Slaven")
with more probability traces it from hohl, i.e., hollow, and as spirits
were believed to dwell in all hollow trees, they were always in its
joints. The ancient Lithuanians, he informs us, worshipped their god
Puschkeit, who was a form of Pluto, in fear and trembling at dusk,
and left their offerings under the elder-tree. Everybody has seen
the little puppets made of a piece of elder-pith with half a bullet
under them, so that they always stand upright, and jump up when
thrown down. Among the Slovaks these seem to have had some magical
application. Perhaps their priests persuaded them that these jumping
Jacks were miraculous, for they called them Pikuljk, a name derived
from Peklo, the under-world. They still believe in a Pikuljk, who
is a servant of the Evil One. He does all kinds of favours for men,
but ends by getting their souls. The ancestors of the Poles were
accustomed to bury all their sins and sorrows under elder-trees,
thinking that they thereby gave to the lower world what properly
belonged to it. This corresponds accurately to the gypsy incantation
which passes the disease on from the elder bark into the earth, and
from earth unto death. Frau Ellhorn, or Ellen, was the old German
name for this plant. "Frau, perhaps, as appropriate to the female
elf who dwelt in it" (Friedrich, "Symbolik," p. 293). When it was
necessary to cut one down, the peasant always knelt first before
it and prayed: "Lady Ellhorn, give me of thy wood, and I will give
thee of mine when it shall grow in the forest." Grimm ("Deutsche
Mythologie," cxvi.) cites from a MS. of 1727 the following: "Paga
nismo ortum debet superstitio, sambucam non esse exscindendum nisi
prius rogata permissione his verbis: Mater Sambuci permitte mihi tuæ
coedere sylvam!" On the other hand, Elder had certain protective and
healing virtues. Hung before a stable door it warded off witchcraft,
and he who planted it conciliated evil spirits. And if a twig of it
were planted on a grave and it grew, that was a sign that the soul of
the deceased was happy, which is the probable reason why the very old
Jewish cemetery in Prague was planted full of elders. In a very curious
and rare work, entitled "Blockesberge Berichtung" (Leipzig, 1669),
by John Prætorius, devoted to "the Witch-ride and Sorcery-Sabbath,"
the author tells us that witches make great use of nine special
herbs--"nam in herbis, verbis et lapidibus magna vis est." Among
these is Elder, of which the peasants make wreaths, which, if they
wear on Walpurgis night, they can see the sorceresses as they sweep
through the air on their brooms, dragons, goats, and other strange
steeds to the Infernal Dance. Or when they anderswo herumvagiren--"go
vagabonding anywhere else." "Yea, and I know one fellow who sware unto
men, that by means of this herb he once saw certain witches churning
butter busily, and that on a roof, but I mistrust that this was a sell
(Schnake), and that the true name of this knave was Butyrolambius"
("Blocksberg," p. 475). The same author informs us that Hollunder
(or Elder) is so called from hohl, or hollow, or else is an anagram
of Unholden, unholy spirits, and some people call it Alhuren, from
its connection with witches and debauchery, even as Cordus writes:--


   "When elder blossoms bloom upon the bush,
    Then women's hearts to sensual pleasure rush."


He closes his comments on this subject with the dry remark that if
the people of Leipzig wear, as is their wont, garlands of elder with
the object of preventing breaches of the seventh commandment among
them, it has in this instance, at least, utterly failed to produce
the expected effect. "Quasi! creadt Judæus Apella!"

It should be mentioned that in the gypsy spell the next morning
the cloth with the elder-bark must be thrown into the next running
water. To cure toothache the Transylvanian gypsies wind a barley-straw
round a stone, which is thrown into a running stream, while saying:--


   "Oh dukh ándre m're dándá,
    Tu ná báres cingerá!
    Ná ává kiyá mánge,
    Mire muy ná hin kere!
    Tut ñikáná me kámáv,
    Ac tu mánge pál pácá;
    Káná e pçus yárpakri
    Avel tele páñori!"

   "Oh, pain in my teeth,
    Trouble me not so greatly!
    Do not come to me,
    My mouth is not thy house.
    I love thee not all,
    Stay thou away from me;
    When this straw is in the brook
    Go away into the water!"


Straw was anciently a symbol of emptiness, unfruitfulness, and
death, and it is evidently used in this sense by the gypsies, or
derived by them from some tradition connected with it. A feigned or
fruitless marriage is indicated in Germany by the terms Strohwittwer
and Strohwittwe. From the earliest times in France the breaking a
straw signified that a compact was broken with a man because there
was nothing in him. Thus in 922 the barons of Charles the Simple, in
dethroning him, broke the straws which they held (Charlotte de La Tour,
"Symbols of Flowers").

Still, straws have something in them. She who will lay straws on the
table in the full moonlight by an open window, especially on Saturday
night, and will repeat--


   "Straw, draw, crow craw,
    By my life I give thee law"--


then the straws will become fairies and dance to the cawing of a crow
who will come and sit on the ledge of the window. And so witches were
wont to make a man of straw, as did Mother Gookin, in Hawthorne's tale,
and unto these they gave life, whence the saying of a man of straw and
straw bail, albeit this latter is deemed by some to be related to the
breaking of straws and of dependence, as told in the tale of Charles
the Simple. Straw-lore is extensive and curious. As in elder-stalks,
small fairies make their homes in its tubes. To strew chopped straw
before the house of a bride was such an insult to her character, in
Germany, and so common that laws were passed against it. I possess
a work printed about 1650, entitled "De Injuriis quæ haud raro
Novis Nuptis inferri solent. I. Per sparsionem dissectorum culmorum
frugum. Germ. Dusch das Werckerling Streuen," &c. An immense amount
of learned quotation and reference by its author indicates that this
custom which was influenced by superstition, was very extensively
written on in its time. It was allied to the binding of knots and
other magic ceremonies to prevent the consummation of marriages.

There is a very curious principle involved in curing certain disorders
or afflictions by means of spells or verses. A certain word is
repeated many times in a mysterious manner, so that it strikes
the imagination of the sufferer. There is found in the Slavonian
countries a woolly caterpillar called Wolos, whose bite, or rather
touch, is much dreaded. I have myself, when a boy, been stung by such
a creature in the United States. As I remember, it was like the sting
of a bee. The following (Malo Russian) spell against it was given me
by Prof. Dragomanoff in Geneva. It is supposed that a certain kind
of disorder, or cutaneous eruption, is caused by the Wolos:--


   "Wolosni--Wolosnicéh!
    Holy Wolos.
    Once a man drove over empty roads
    With empty oxen,
    To an empty field,
    To harvest empty corn,
    And gather it in empty ricks.
    He gathered the empty sheaves,
    Laid them in empty wagons,
    Drove over empty roads,
    Unto an empty threshing-floor.
    The empty labourers threshed it,
    And bore it to the empty mill.
    The empty baker (woman)
    Mixed it in an empty trough,
    And baked it in an empty oven.
    The empty people ate the empty bread.
    So may the Wolos swallow this disorder
    From the empty ---- (here the name of the patient.)


What is here understood by "empty" is that the swelling is taken away,
subtracted, or emptied, by virtue of the repetition of the word,
as if one should say, "Be thou void. Depart! depart! depart! Avoid me!"

There is a very curious incantation also apparently of Indian-gypsy
origin, since it refers to the spirits of the water who cause
diseases. In this instance they are supposed to be exorcised by Saint
Paphnutius, who is a later Slavonian-Christian addition to the old
Shamanic spell. In the Accadian-Chaldæan formulas these spirits are
seven; here they are seventy.

The formula in question is against the fever:--


    "In the name of God and his Son and the Holy Ghost. Amen!

    "Seventy fair maids went up out of the ocean.

    "They met the Saint Paphnutius, who asked:

    "'Whence come ye, oh Maidens?'

    "They answered, 'From the ocean-sea.

    "'We go into the world to break the bones of men.

    "'To give them the fever. (To make hot and cold).'"


Then the holy Paphnutius began to beat them, and gave them every one
seventy-seven days:--


    "They began to pray, 'O holy Paphnutius!

    "'Forgive us, (and) whoever shall bear with him (thy) name,
    or write it, him we will leave in peace.

    "'We will depart from him

    "Over the streams, over the seas.

    "'Over the reeds (canes) and marshes.

    "'O holy Paphnutius, sua misericordia, of thy mercy,

    "'Have pity on thy slave, even on the sick man ---- (the name is
    here uttered),

    "'Free him from fever!'"


It is remarkable that, as a certain mysterious worm, caterpillar, or
small lizard (accounts differ) among the Algonkin Indians is supposed
to become at will a dragon, or sorcerer, or spirit, to be invoked or
called on, so the Wolos worm is also invoked, sometimes as a saint
or sorcerer, and sometimes as a spirit who scatters disease. The
following gypsy-Slavonian incantation over an invalid has much in
common with the old Chaldæan spells:--


   "Wolosni, Wolosnicéh!
    Thou holy Wolos!
    God calls thee unto his dwelling,
    Unto his seat.
    Thou shalt not remain here,
    To break the yellow bones.
    To drink the red blood,
    To dry up the white body.
    Go forth as the bright sun
    Goes forth over the mountains,
    Out from the seventy-seven veins,
    Out from the seventy limbs (parts of the body).
    Before I shall recognize thee,
    Before I did not name thee (call on thee).
    But now I know who thou art;
    I began to pray to the mother of God,
    And the mother of God began to aid me.
    Go as the wind goes over the meadows or the shore (or banks),
    As the waves roll over the waters,
    So may the Wolos go from ----
    The man who is born,
    Who is consecrated with prayer."


The Shamanic worship of water as a spirit is extremely ancient,
and is distinctly recognized as such by the formulas of the Church
in which water is called "this creature." The water spirits play a
leading part in the gypsy mythology. The following gypsy-Slav charm, to
consecrate a swarm of bees, was also given to me by Prof. Dragomanoff,
who had learned it from a peasant:--


   "One goes to the water and makes his prayer and greets the
    water thus:--


       "Hail to thee, Water!
        Thou Water, Oliana!
        Created by God,
        And thou, oh Earth, Titiana!
        And ye the near springs, brooks and rivulets,
        Thou Water, Oliana,
        Thou goest over the earth,
        Over the neighbouring fountains and streams,
        Down unto the sea,
        Thou dost purify the sea,
        The sand, the rocks, and the roots--
        I pray thee grant me
        Of the water of this lake,
        To aid me,
        To sprinkle my bees.
        I will speak a word,
        And God will give me help,
        The all-holy Mother of God,
        The mother of Christ,
        Will aid me,
        And the holy Father
        The holy Zosimos, Sabbateus and the holy Friday Parascabeah!


   "When this is said take the water and bear it home without looking
    back. Then the bees are to be sprinkled therewith."


The following Malo-Russian formula from the same authority, though
repointed and gilt with Greek Christianity, is old heathen, and
especially interesting since Prof. Dragomanoff traces it to a Finnic
Shaman source:--


   "Charm Against the Bite of a Serpent.


                  "The holy Virgin sent a man
                   Unto Mount Sion,
                   Upon this mountain
                   Is the city of Babylon,
                   And in the city of Babylon
                   Lives Queen Volga.

                   Oh Queen Volga,
                   Why dost thou not teach
                   This servant of God
    (Here the name of the one bitten by a serpent is mentioned)
                   So that he may not be bitten
                   By serpents?"


    (The reply of Queen Volga)


                  "Not only will I teach my descendants
                   But I also will prostrate myself
                   Before the Lord God."


   "Volga is the name of a legendary heathen princess of Kief, who
    was baptized and sainted by the Russian Church. The feminine
    form, Olga, or Volga, corresponds to the masculine name Oleg,
    or Olg, the earliest legendary character of Kief. His surname
    was Viechtchig--the sage or sorcerer" (i.e., wizard, and from a
    cognate root). "In popular songs he is called Volga, or Volkh,
    which is related to Volkv, a sorcerer. The Russian annals speak
    of the Volkv of Finland, who are represented as Shamans." Niya
    Predania i Raskazi ("Traditions and Popular Tales of Lesser
    Russia," by M. Dragomanoff, Kief, 1876) in Russian.


I have in the chapter on curing the disorders of children spoken of
Lilith, or Herodias, who steals the new-born infants. She and her
twelve daughters are also types of the different kinds of fever for
which the gypsies have so many cures of the same character, precisely
as those which were used by the old Bogomiles. The characteristic
point is that this female spirit is everywhere regarded as the cause
of catalepsy or fits. Hence the invocation to St. Sisinie is used in
driving them away. This invocation written, is carried as an amulet
or fetish. I give the translation of one of these from the Roumanian,
in which the Holy Virgin is taken as the healer. It is against cramp
in the night:--


   "Spell Against Night-cramp.

   "There is a mighty hill, and on this hill is a golden apple-tree.

   "Under the golden apple-tree is a golden stool.

   "On the stool--who sits there?

   "There sits the Mother of God with Saint Maria; with the boxes
    in her right hand, with the cup in her left.

   "She looks up and sees naught, she looks down and sees my Lord
    and Lady Disease.

   "Lords and Ladies Cramp, Lord and Lady Vampire--Lord Wehrwolf
    and his wives.

   "They are going to ---- (the sufferer), to drink his blood and
    put in him a foul heart.

   "The Mother of God, when she saw them, went down to them, spoke
    to them, and asked them, 'Whither go ye, Lord and Lady Disease,
    Lords and Ladies Cramp, &c.?'

  "'We go to ---- to drink his blood, to change his heart to a
    foul one.'

  "'No, ye shall return; give him his blood back, restore him his
    own heart, and leave him immediately.'

   "Cramps of the night, cramps of the midnight, cramps of the day,
    cramps wherever they are. From water, from the wind, go out from
    the brain, from the light of the face, from the hearing of the
    ears, from his heart, from his hands and feet, from the soles of
    his feet.

   "Go and hide where black cocks never crow, [6] where men never go,
    where no beast roars.

   "Hide yourself there, stop there, and never show yourself more!

   "May ---- remain pure and glad, as he was made by God, and was
    fated by the Mother of God!

   "The spell is mine--the cure is God's."


In reference to the name Herodias (here identified with Lilith, the
Hebrew mother of all devils and goblins); it was a great puzzle to
the writers on witchcraft why the Italian witches always said they
had two queens whom they worshipped--Diana and Herodias. The latter
seems to have specially presided at the witch-dance. In this we can
see an evident connection with the Herodias of the New Testament.

I add to this a few more very curious old Slavonian spells from
Dr. Gaster's work, as they admirably illustrate one of the principal
and most interesting subjects connected with the gypsy witchcraft;
that is to say, its relation to early Shamanism and the forms in
which its incantations were expressed. In all of these it may be
taken for granted, from a great number of closely-allied examples,
that the Christianity in them is recent and that they all go back to
the earliest heathen times. The following formula, dating from 1423,
against snake-bites bears the title:--


   "Prayer of St. Paul against Snakes.

   "In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. I once
    was a persecutor, but am now a true follower; and I went from
    my dwelling-place in Sicily, and they set light to a trunk,
    and a snake came therefrom and bit my right hand and hung from
    it. But I had in me the power of God, and I shook it off into the
    burning fire and it was destroyed, and I suffered no ill from the
    bite. I laid myself down to sleep; then the mighty angel said:
    'Saul, Paul, stand up and receive this writing'; and I found in
    it the following words:

  "'I exorcise you, sixty and a half kinds of beasts that creep on
    the earth, in the name of God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth,
    and in the name of the immovable throne.

  "'Serpent of Evil, I exorcise thee in the name of the burning
    river which rises under the footstool of the Saviour, and in the
    name of His incorporeal angels!

  "'Thou snake of the tribe of basilisks, thou foul-headed snake,
    twelve-headed snake, variegated snake, dragon-like snake, that art
    on the right side of hell, whomsoever thou bitest thou shalt have
    no power to harm, and thou must go away with all the twenty-four
    kinds. If a man has this prayer and this curse of the true, holy
    apostle, and a snake bites him, then it will die on the spot, and
    the man that is bitten shall remain unharmed, to the honour of the
    Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, now and for all time. Amen.'"


It is not improbable that we have in Paul and the Serpent and the
formula for curing its bite (which is a common symbol for all disease)
a souvenir of Esculapius, the all-healer, and his serpent. The
following is "a prayer against the toothache, to be carried about
with one," i.e., as an amulet prayer:--


   "Spell for the Toothache.

   "Saint Peter sat on a stone and wept. Christ came to him and said,
   'Peter, why weepest thou?' Peter answered, 'Lord, my teeth pain
    me.' The Lord thereupon ordered the worm in Peter's tooth to come
    out of it and never more go in again. Scarcely had the worm come
    out when the pain ceased. Then spoke Peter, 'I pray you, O Lord,
    that when these words be written out and a man carries them he
    shall have no toothache.' And the Lord answered, ''Tis well,
    Peter; so may it be!'"


It will hardly be urged that this Slavonian charm of Eastern origin
could have been originated independently in England. The following,
which is there found in the north, is, as Gaster remarks, "in the
same wording":--


   "Peter was sitting on a marble stone,
    And Jesus passed by.
    Peter said, 'My Lord, my God,
    How my tooth doth ache!'
    Jesus said, 'Peter art whole!
    And whosoever keeps these words for My sake
    Shall never have the toothache.'"


The next specimen is a--


   "Charm against Nose-bleeding.

   "Zachariah was slain in the Lord's temple, and his blood turned
    into stone. Then stop, O blood, for the Lord's servant, ----. I
    exorcise thee, blood, that thou stoppest in the name of the
    Saviour, and by fear of the priests when they perform the liturgy
    at the altar."


Those who sell these charms are almost universally supposed to be
mere quacks and humbugs. If this were the case, why do they so very
carefully learn and preserve these incantations, transmitting them


          "as a rich legacy
    Unto their issue."


But they really do believe in them, and will give great prices for
them. Prof. Dragomanoff told me that once in Malo-Russia it became
generally known that he had made a MS. collection of such spells. A
peasant who was desirous of becoming a sorcerer, but who had very few
incantations of his own, went whenever he could by stealth into the
Professor's library and surreptitiously copied his incantations. And
when Prof. Dragomanoff returned the next year to that neighbourhood, he
found the peasant doing a very good business as a conjuring doctor, or
faith-healer. I have a lady correspondent in the United States who has
been initiated into Voodoo and studied Indian-negro witchcraft under
two eminent teachers, one a woman, the other a man. The latter, who
was at the very head of the profession, sought the lady's acquaintance
because he had heard that she possessed some very valuable spells. In
the fourth or highest degree, as in Slavonian or Hungarian gypsy-magic,
this Indian-Voodoo deals exclusively with the spirits of the forest
and stream.

M. Kounavine, as set forth by Dr. A. Elysseeff (Gypsy-Lore Journal,
July, 1890), gives a Russian gypsy incantation by which the fire is
invoked to cure illness. It is as follows:--


   "Great Fire, my defender and protector, son of the celestial fire,
    equal of the sun who cleanses the earth of foulness, deliver this
    man from the evil sickness that torments him night and day!"


The fire is also invoked to punish, or as an ordeal, e.g.:--


   "Fire, who punishest the evil-doer, who hatest falsehood,
    who scorchest the impure, thou destroyest offenders; thy flame
    devoureth the earth. Devour ---- if he says what is not true,
    if he thinks a lie, and if he acts deceitfully."


These are pronounced by the gypsy sorcerer facing the burning
hearth. There is another in which fire is addressed as Jandra, and
also invoked to punish an offender:--


   "Jandra, bearer of thunderbolts, great Periani (compare Parjana,
    an epithet of Indra, Slavonic Perun), bearer of lightning, slay
    with thy thunderbolt and burn with thy celestial fire him who
    dares to violate his oath."








CHAPTER III.

GYPSY CONJURATIONS AND EXORCISMS--THE CURE OF CHILDREN--HUNGARIAN
GYPSY SPELLS--A CURIOUS OLD ITALIAN "SECRET"--THE MAGIC VIRTUE OF
GARLIC--A FLORENTINE INCANTATION LEARNED FROM A WITCH--LILITH, THE
CHILD-STEALER, AND QUEEN OF THE WITCHES.


In all the schools of Shamanic sorcery, from those of the
Assyrian-Accadian to the widely-spread varieties of the present day,
the Exorcism forms the principal element. An exorcism is a formula,
the properties or power of which is that when properly pronounced,
especially if this be done with certain fumigations and ceremonies, it
will drive away devils, diseases, and disasters of every description;
nay, according to very high, and that by no means too ancient,
authority, it is efficacious in banishing bugs, mice, or locusts,
and it is equal to Persian powder as a fuge for fleas, but is,
unfortunately, too expensive to be used for that purpose save by the
very wealthy. It has been vigorously applied against the grape disease,
the Colorado beetle, the army worm, and the blizzard in the United
States, but, I believe, without effect, owing possibly to differences
of climate or other antagonistic influences.

Closely allied to the Exorcism is the Benediction, which soon grew
out of it as a cure. The former being meant to repel and drive away
evil, the latter very naturally suggested itself, by a law of moral
polarity, as a means of attracting good fortune, blessings, health, and
peace. As the one was violently curative, the other was preventive. The
benediction would keep the devils and all their works away from a man
or his home--in fact, if stables be only well blessed once a year,
no mishaps can come to any of the animals who inhabit them; and I
myself have known a number of donkeys to receive a benediction in
Rome, the owner being assured that it would keep them safe from all
the ills which donkeys inherit. And in the year 1880, in one of the
principal churches of Philadelphia, blessed candles were sold to a
congregation under guarantee that the purchase of one would preserve
its possessor for one year against all disorders of the throat, on
which occasion a sermon was preached, in the which seven instances
were given in which people had thus been cured.

Between blessing and banning it soon became evident that many formulas
of words could be used to bring about mysterious results. It is
probable that the Exorcism in its original was simply the angry,
elevated tone of voice which animals as well as men instinctively
employ to repel an enemy or express a terror. For this unusual language
would be chosen, remembered, and repeated. With every new utterance
this outcry or curse would be more seriously pronounced or enlarged
till it became an Ernulphian formula. The next step would be to give
it metric form, and its probable development is very interesting. It
does not seem to have occurred to many investigators that in early
ages all things whatever which were remembered and repeated were
droned and intoned, or sing-sung, until they fell of themselves into
a kind of metre. In all schools at the present day, where boys are
required to repeat aloud and all together the most prosaic lessons,
they end by chanting them in rude rhythm. All monotone, be it that
of a running brook, falls into cadence and metre. All of the sagas,
or legends, of the Algonkin-Wabanaki were till within even fifty years
chants or songs, and if they are now rapidly losing that character it
is because they are no longer recited with the interest and accuracy
which was once observed in the narrators. But it was simply because
all things often repeated were thus intoned that the exorcisms became
metrical. It is remarkable that among the Aryan races it assumed what
is called the staff-rhyme, like that which Shakespeare, and Ben Jonson,
and Byron, and many more employ, as it would seem, instinctively,
whenever witches speak or spells or charms are uttered. It will not
escape the reader that, in the Hungarian gypsy incantations in this
work, the same measure is used as that which occurs in the Norse
sagas, or in the scenes of Macbeth. It is also common in Italy. This
is intelligible--that its short, bold, deeply-marked movement has
in itself something mysterious and terrible. If that wofully-abused
word "weird" has any real application to anything, it is to the
staff-rhyme. I believe that when a man, and particularly a woman, does
not know what else to say, he or she writes "lurid," or "weird," and I
lately met with a book of travels in which I found the latter applied
seventy-six times to all kinds of conundrums, until I concluded that,
like the coachman's definition of an idea in Heine's "Reisebilder," it
meant simply "any d----d nonsense that a man gets into his head." But
if weird really and only means that which is connected with fate or
destiny, from the Anglo-Saxon Weordan, to become, German, Werden,
then it is applicable enough to rhymes setting forth the future and
spoken by the "weird sisters," who are so-called not because they are
awful or nightmarish, or pokerish, or mystical, or bug-a-boorish,
but simply because they predict the future or destiny of men. "The
Athenians as well as Gentiles excelled in these songs of sorcery,
hence we are told (Varro, "Q. de Fascin") that in Achaia, when they
learned that a certain woman who used them was an Athenian they stoned
her to death, declaring that the immortal gods bestowed on man the
power of healing with stones, herbs, and animals, not with words"
("De Rem. Superstit. Cognos cendis"). Truly, doctors never agree.

It was in 1886 that I learned from a girl in Florence two exorcisms
or invocations which she was accustomed to repeat before telling
fortunes by cards. This girl, who was of the Tuscan Romagna and
who looked Etruscan with a touch of gypsy blood, was a repertory of
popular superstitions, especially witch-lore, and a maker and wearer
of fetishes, always carrying a small bag full of them. Bon sang ne
peut mentir.

The two formulas were as follows. I omit a portion from each:--


   "Venti cinque carte siete!
    Venti cinque diavoli diventerete,
    Diventerete, anderete
    Nel' corpo, nel' sangue nell' anima,
    Nell' sentimenti del corpo;
    Del mio amante non posso vivere,
    Non passa stare ne bere,
    Ne mangiare ne ...
    Ne con uomini ne con donne non passa favellare,
    Finche a la porta di casa mia
    Non viene picchiare!"

   "Ye are twenty-five cards,
    Become twenty-five devils!
    Enter into the body, into the blood, into the soul;
    Into the feelings of the body
    Of my lover, from whom I cannot live.
    For I cannot stand (exist), or drink,
    Or eat ...
    Nor can I converse with men or women
    Till at the door of my house
    He shall come to knock."


The second incantation was the same, but beginning with these words:--


   "I put five fingers on the wall,
    I conjure five devils,
    Five monks and five friars,
    That they may enter the body
    Into the blood, into the soul," &c.


If the reader will take Le Normant's "Magie Chaldaienne," and carefully
compare these Italian spells with those of ancient Nineveh, he will
not only find a close general resemblance, but all the several details
or actual identity of words. And it is not a little curious that the
same formulas which were repeated--


   "Once on a time when Babylon was young"--


should still be current in Italy. So it passed through the ages--races
came and went--and among the people the old sorcery was handed
across and adown, so that it still lives. But in a few years more
the Folk-lorist will be its only repository.

This chapter is devoted to conjuring diseases of children by
gypsies. It bears a great likeness to one in the very devout work
of Peter Pipernus, "De Pueris affectis morbis magicis" ("Of Boys who
have been Bewitched into Disease"), only that Pipernus uses Catholic
incantations, which he also employs "pro ligatis in matrimonio,"
"pro incubo magico," "de dolóribus stomachi magicis," &c., for to him,
as he declares, all disease is of magic origin.

The magic of the gypsies is not all deceit, though they deceive with
it. They put faith themselves in their incantations, and practise
them on their own account. "And they believe that there are women,
and sometimes men, who possess supernatural power, partly inherited
and partly acquired." The last of seven daughters born in succession,
without a boy's coming into the series, is wonderfully gifted, for
she can see hidden treasure or spirits, or enjoy second sight of many
things invisible to men. And the same holds good for the ninth in a
series of boys, who may become a seer of the same sort. Such a girl,
i.e., a seventh daughter, being a fortune in herself, never lacks
lovers. In 1883 the young Vojvode, or leader, of the Kukaya gypsy
tribe, named Danku Niculai, offered the old gypsy woman, Pale Boshe,
one hundred ducats if she would persuade her seventh daughter to
marry him. In the United States of America there are many women who
advertise in the newspapers that they also are seventh daughters
of seventh daughters at that, and who make a good thing of it as
fortune-tellers; but they have a far more speedy, economical, and
effective way of becoming the last note in an octave, than by awaiting
the slow processes of being begotten or born, inasmuch as they boldly
declare themselves to be sevenths, which I am assured answers every
purpose, as nobody ever asks to see their certificates of baptism
any more than of marriage. [7]

Most of these witch-wives--also known in Hungary as cohalyi, or "wise
women," or gule romni, "sweet" or "charming women"--are trained up
from infancy by their mothers in medicine and magic. A great part
of this education consists in getting by heart the incantations or
formulas of which specimens will be given anon, and which, in common
with their fairy tales, show intrinsic evidence of having been drawn
at no very distant period from India, and probably in common with
the lower or Shamanic religion of India from Turanian sources. But
there is among the Hungarian gypsies a class of female magicians who
stand far above their sisters of the hidden spell in power. These
are the lace romni, or "good women," who draw their power directly
from the Nivasi or Pchuvusi, the spirits of water and earth, or of
flood and fell. For the Hungarian gypsies have a beautiful mythology
of their own which at first sight would seem to be a composition of
the Rosicrucian as set forth by Paracelsus and the Comte de Gabalis,
with the exquisite Indo-Teutonic fairy tales of the Middle Ages. In
fact, in some of the incantations used we find the Urme, or fairies,
directly appealed to for help.

With the gypsies, as among the early Accadians, diseases are supposed
to be caused by evil supernatural influences. This is more naturally
the case among people who lead very simple lives, and with whom
sickness is not almost a natural or normal condition, as it is
with ladies and gentlemen, or the inhabitants of cities, who have
"always something the matter with them." Nomadic life is conducive to
longevity. "Our grandfathers died on the gallows--we die from losing
our teeth," said an old gypsy to Doctor von Wlislocki, when asked what
his age was. Therefore among all people who use charms and spells those
which are devoted to cure occupy the principal position. However,
the Hungarian Romany have many medicines, more or less mysterious,
which they also apply in connection with the "healing rhymes." And
as in the struggle for life the weakest go first to the wall, the
remedies for the diseases of children are predominant.

When a mother begins to suffer the pangs of childbirth, a fire is made
before her tent, which is kept up till the infant is baptized, in order
to drive away evil spirits. Certain women feed this fire, and while
fanning it (fans being used for bellows) murmur the following rhyme:--


   "Oh yakh, oh yakh pçabuva,
                     Pçabuva,
    Te cavéstár tu trádá,
                Tu trada,
    Pçúvushen te Nivashen
    Tire tçuva the traden!
    Lace Urmen ávená,
    Caves báçtáles dena,
    Káthe hin yov báçtáles,
    Andre lime báçtáles!
    Motura te ráná,
    Te átunci but' ráná,
    Motura te ráná,
    Te átunci, but' ráná,
    Me dav' andre yákherá!
    Oh yákh, oh yákh pçabuva,
    Rovel cavo: áshuna!"


It may here be remarked that the pronunciation of all these words
is the same as in German, with the following additions. C = teh in
English, or to ch in church. C = ch in German as in Buch. J = azs,
or the English j, in James; n, as in Spanish, or nj in German, while
sh and y are pronounced as in English. Á is like ah. The literal
translation is:--


   "Oh Fire, oh Fire, burn!
                      Burn!
    And from the child (do) thou drive away
                                 Drive away!
    Pçuvuse and Nivashi
    And drive away thy smoke (pl.)
    (Let) good fairies come (and)
    Give luck to the child,
    Here it is lucky (or fortunate)
    In the world fortunate
    Brooms and twigs (fuel)
    And then more twigs,
    And then yet more twigs
    I put (give) to the fire.
    Oh fire, oh fire--burn!
    The child weeps: listen!"


In South Hungary the gypsy women on similar occasions sing the
following charm:--


   "Eftá Pçuvushá, efta Niváshá
    André mal avená
    Pçabuven, pçabuven, oh yákhá!
    Dáyákri punro dindálen,
    Te gule caves mudáren;
    Pçabuven, pçabuven, oh yákhá;
    Ferinen o caves te daya!"

   "Seven Pçuvushe, seven Nivasi
    Come into the field,
    Burn, burn, oh fire!
    They bite the mother's foot,
    They destroy the sweet child;
    Fire, fire, oh burn!
    Protect the child and the mother!"


When the birth is very difficult, the mother's relations come to help,
and one of them lets an egg fall, zwischen den Beinen derselben. On
this occasion the gypsy women in Southern Hungary sing:--


   "Ánro, ánro in obles,
    Te e pera in obles:
    Ava cavo sástávestes!
    Devlá, devlá, tut akharel!"

   "The egg, the egg is round,
    And the belly is round,
    Come child in good health!
    God, God calls thee!"


If a woman dies in child-bed two eggs are placed under her arms and
the following couplet is muttered:--


   "Kana anro kirnes hin,
    Kathe nañi tçudá hin!"

   "When this egg is (shall be) decayed,
    Here (will be) is no milk!"


When the after-pains begin it is the custom with some of the gypsy
tribes in the Siebenburgen to smoke the sufferer with decayed
willow-wood which is burned for the purpose while the women in
attendance sing:--


   "Sik te sik o tçu urál,
    Te urál o con urál!
    Kana len hádjináven
    Sascipená tut' áven;
    Káná o tçu ná urál--
    Tute náñi the dukhal,
    Tute náñi the dukhal."

   "Fast and fast the smoke flies,
    And flies, the moon flies,
    When they find (themselves)
    Health (yet) will come to thee,
    "When the smoke no (longer) flies
    Thou wilt feel pain no more!"


There is a strange, mysterious affinity between gypsies and the moon. A
wonderful legend, which they certainly brought from India since in it
Mekran is mentioned as the place where its incident occurred, details
that there, owing to the misrepresentations of a sorcerer, the gypsy
leader, Chen, was made to marry his sister Guin, or Kan, which brought
the curse of wandering upon his people. Hence the Romany are called
Chen-Guin. It is very evident that here we have Chon and Kan, or Kam,
the Moon and Sun, which is confirmed by another gypsy legend which
declares that the Sun, because he once violated or still seeks to
seduce his sister, the Moon, continually follows her, being destined
to wander for ever. And as the name Chen-Kan, or Zingan, or Zigeuner,
is known all over the East, and, as this legend shows, is of Indian
origin, it is hardly worth while to believe with Miklosich that it is
derived from an obscure Greek heretical sect of Christians--the more
so as it is most difficult to believe that the Romany were originally
either Greeks or Christians or Christian heretics.

When a gypsy woman is with child she will not, if she can help it,
leave her tent by full moonshine. A child born at this time it is
believed will make a happy marriage. So it is said of birth in the
Western World:--


   "Full moon, high sea,
    Great man thou shalt be;
    Red dawning, cloudy sky,
    Bloody death shalt thou die.

   "Pray to the Moon when she is round,
    Luck with you will then abound,
    What you seek for shall be found
    On the sea or solid ground."


Moon-worship is very ancient; it is alluded to as a forbidden
thing in the Book of Job. From early times witches and other women
worked their spells when stark-naked by the light of the full moon,
which is evidently derived from the ancient worship of that planet
and the shameless orgies connected with it. Dr. Wlislocki simply
remarks on this subject that the moon has, in the gypsy incantation,
"eine Phallische Bedeutung." In ancient symbolism the horns of the
moon were regarded as synonymous with the horns of the ox--hence
their connection with agriculture, productiveness, and fertility,
or the generative principle, and from this comes the beneficent
influence not only of the horns, but of horse-shoes, boars' tusks,
crabs' claws, and pieces of coral resembling them.

The great love of gypsy mothers for their children, says Wlislocki,
induces their friends to seek remedies for the most trifling
disorders. At a later period, mother and child are left to Mother
Nature--or the vis medicatrix Naturæ. What is greatly dreaded is the
Berufen, or being called on, "enchanted," in English "overlooked,"
or subjected to the evil eye. An universal remedy for this is the
following:--

A jar is filled with water from a stream, and it must be taken with,
not against, the current as it runs. In it are placed seven coals,
seven handfuls of meal, and seven cloves of garlic, all of which is
put on the fire. When the water begins to boil it is stirred with a
three-forked twig, while the wise woman repeats:--


   "Miseç' yakhá tut dikhen,
    Te yon káthe mudáren!
    Te átunci eftá coká
    Te çaven miseçe yakhá;
    Miseç' yakhá tut dikhen,
    Te yon káthe mudáren!
    But práhestár e yakhá
    Atunci kores th'ávená;
    Miseç' yakhá tut dikhen
    Te yon káthe mudáren!
    Pçábuvená pçábuvená
    Andre develeskero yakhá!"

   "Evil eyes look on thee,
    May they here extinguished be!
    And then seven ravens
    Pluck out the evil eyes;
    Evil eyes (now) look on thee,
    May they soon extinguished be!
    Much dust in the eyes,
    Thence may they become blind,
    Evil eyes now look on thee;
    May they soon extinguished be!
    May they burn, may they burn
    In the fire of God!"


Dr. Wlislocki remarks that the "seven ravens" are probably represented
by the seven coals, while the three-pointed twig, the meal and the
garlic, symbolize lightning. He does not observe that the stick may be
the triçula or trident of Siva--whence probably the gipsy word trushul,
a cross; but the connection is very obvious. It is remarkable that the
gypsies assert that lightning leaves behind it a smell like that of
garlic. As garlic forms an important ingredient in magic charms, the
following from "The Symbolism of Nature" ("Die Symbolik und Mythologie
der Natur"), by J. B. Friedrich, will be found interesting:--


   "We find in many forms spread far and wide the belief that
    garlic possesses the magic power of protection against poison and
    sorcery. This comes, according to Pliny, from the fact that when
    it is hung up in the open air for a time, it turns black, when
    it is supposed to attract evil into itself--and, consequently, to
    withdraw it from the wearer. The ancients believed that the herb
    which Mercury gave to Ulysses to protect him from the enchantment
    of Circe, and which Homer calls moly, was the alium nigrum, or
    garlic, the poison of the witch being a narcotic. Among the modern
    Greeks and Turks, garlic is regarded as the most powerful charm
    against evil spirits, magic, and misfortune. For this reason they
    carry it with them, and hang it up in their houses as a protection
    against storms and bad weather. So their sailors carry with them
    a sack of it to avert shipwreck. If any one utters a word of
    praise with the intention of fascinating or of doing harm, they
    cry aloud 'Garlic!' or utter it three times rapidly. In Aulus
    Persius Flaccus (Satyr. V.) to bite garlic averts magic and the
    evils which the gods send to those who are wanting in reverence
    for them. According to a popular belief the mere pronunciation of
    'Garlic!' protects one from poison."


It appears to be generally held among them and the Poles that this
word prevents children from "beschreien werden" that is, from being
banned, or overlooked, or evil-eyed. And among the Poles garlic
is laid under children's pillows to protect them from devils and
witches. (Bratraneck, "Beiträge zur Æsthetik der Pflanzenwelt,"
p. 56). The belief in garlic as something sacred appears to have been
very widely spread, since the Druids attributed magic virtues to it;
hence the reverence for the nearly allied leek, which is attached to
King David and so much honoured by the Welsh.


   "Tell him I'll knock his leek about his pate
    Upon Saint David's Day."--Shakespeare.


The magic virtues of garlic were naturally enough also attributed to
onions and leeks, and in a curious Italian work, entitled "Il Libro
del Comando," attributed (falsely) to Cornelius Agrippa, I find
the following:--


   "Segreto magico d'indovinare, colle cipole, la salute d'una
    persona lontana. A magic secret to divine with onions the health
    of a person far distant. Gather onions on the Eve of Christmas
    and put them on an altar, and under every onion write the name
    of the persons as to whom one desires to be informed, ancorche
    non scrivano, even if they do not write.

   "The onion (planted) which sprouts the first will clearly announce
    that the person whose name it bears is well.

   "And in the same manner we can learn the name of the husband or
    wife whom we should choose, and this divination is in use in many
    cantons of Germany."


Very much allied to this is the following love charm from an English
gypsy:--


   "Take an onion, a tulip, or any root of the kind (i.e. a bulbous
    root?), and plant it in a clean pot never used before; and while
    you plant it repeat the name of the one whom you love, and every
    day, morning and evening, say over it:--

  "'As this root grows
    And as this blossom blows,
    May her heart be
    Turned unto me!'


"And it will come to pass that every day the one whom you love will
be more and more inclined to you, till you get your heart's desire."


A similar divination is practised by sowing cress or lettuce seed in
the form of names in gardens. If it grows well the one who plants it
will win the love of the person indicated.

As regards the use of coals in incantations, Marcellus Burdigalensis,
[8] a Latin physician of the third century, who has left us a
collection of Latin and Gaelic charms, recommends for a cure for
toothache: "Salis granum, panis micam, carbonem mortuum in phoenicio
alligabis," i.e., to carry a grain of salt, a crumb of bread, and a
coal, in a red bag.

When the witch-brew of coals, garlic, and meal is made, and boiled
down to a dry residuum, it is put into a small three-cornered bag,
and hung about the child's neck, on which occasion the appropriate
rhyme is repeated nine times. "And it is of special importance that
the bag shall be made of a piece of linen, which must be stolen,
found, or begged."

To learn whether a child has been overlooked, or evil-eyed, or
enchanted, the "wise woman" takes it in her arms, and goes to the
next running stream. There she holds the face of the babe as nearly
as she can to the water, and repeats:--


   "Páñi, páñi sikova,
    Dikh the upré, dikh télé!
    Buti páñi sikovel
    Buti pál yákh the dikhel
    Te ákáná mudárel."

   "Water, water, hasten!
    Look up, look down!
    Much water hastens
    (May) as much come into the eye
    Which looked evil on thee,
    And may it now perish."


If the running brook makes a louder sound than usual then it is
supposed to say that the child is enchanted, but if it runs on as
before then something else is the matter, and to ascertain what it
is other charms and ceremonies are had recourse to. This incantation
indicates, like many others, a constant dwelling in lonely places,
by wood and stream, as gypsies wont to do, and sweet familiarity with
Nature, until one hears sermons in stones, books in the running brooks,
and voices in the wind. [9] Civilized people who read about Red Indian
sorcerers and gypsy witches very promptly conclude that they are mere
humbugs or lunatics--they do not realize how these people, who pass
half their lives in wild places watching waving grass and falling
waters, and listening to the brook until its cadence speaks in real
song, believe in their inspirations, and feel that there is the same
mystical feeling and presence in all things that live and move and
murmur as well as in themselves. Now we have against this the life
of the clubs and family, of receptions and business, factories and
stock-markets, newspapers and "culture." Absolutely no one who lives
in "the movement" can understand this sweet old sorcery. But nature
is eternal, and while grass grows and rivers run man is ever likely
to fall again into the eternal enchantments. And truly until he does
he will have no new poetry, no fresh art, and must go on copying old
ideas and having wretchedly worn-out exhibitions in which there is
not one original idea.

If it appears that the child is overlooked, or "berufen," many means
are resorted to, "one good if another fails," but we have here to do
only with those which are connected with incantations. A favourite
one is the following: Three twigs are cut, each one from a different
tree, and put into a pipkin which has been filled with water dipped
or drawn with, not against, the current of a stream. Three handfuls
of meal are then put in and boiled down to a Brei, or pudding. A
horse hair is then wound round a needle, which is stuck not by the
point but by the head into the inner bottom of a tub, which is filled
with water, and placed upon this is the pipkin with the pudding. Then
the "overlooked," or evil-seen child is held over the tub while the
following rhyme is chanted:--


   "Páñi, páñi lunjárá,
    Páñi, páñi isbiná;
    Te náshválipen çucá
    Náshválipen mudárá,
    Mudára te ákáná,
    Káthe beshá ñikáná,
    Sár práytiña sutyárel,
    Káthe ándre piri, ándre piri,
    Nivasheshe les dávás!"

   "Water, water, spread!
    Water, water, stretch!
    And sickness disappear,
    Sickness be destroyed,
    Be destroyed now.
    Remain not here at all!
    Who ever has overlooked this child
    As this leaf in the pot (maybe)
    Be given to the Nivashi!"


This is repeated nine times, when the water in the tub, with the
pipkin and its contents, are all thrown into the stream from which the
water was drawn. This is a widely-spread charm, and it is extremely
ancient. The pipkin placed across the tub or trough--trog--here
signifies a bridge, and Wlislocki tells us that no Transylvanian
tent-gypsy will cross a bridge without first spitting thrice over
the rails into the water. The bridge plays an important part in
the mythology and Folk-lore of many races. The ancient Persians
had their holy mountain, Albordi, or Garotman, the abode of gods
and blessed souls, to which they passed by the bridge Cin-vat, or
Chinevad, whence the creed: "I believe in the resurrection of the
dead; that all bodies shall live renewed again, and I believe that
by the bridge Cin-vat all good deeds will be rewarded, and all evil
deeds punished." The punishment is apparent from the parallel of
the bridge Al Sirat, borrowed by the Mahommedans from the Persians,
over which the good souls passed to reward, and from which the wicked
tumbled down into hell.

When I first met Emerson in 1849 I happened to remark that a bridge
in a landscape was like a vase in a room, the point on which an
eye trained to the picturesque involuntarily rested. Nearly thirty
years after, when we were both living at Shepherd's Hotel in Cairo,
he reminded me of this one day when by the Nile we were looking
at a bridge. As a bridge must cross a stream, or a torrent which
is generally beautiful by itself, and as the cross or span has the
effect of defining and framing the picture, as a circlet or tiara
sets off a beautiful head, it is not remarkable that in all ages
men have made such objects subjects of legend and song. Hence the
oft-repeated Devil's Bridge, so-called because it seemed to simple
peasants impossible for mere mortals to build, although bridges are
habitually and more naturally connected with salvation and saints. He
who in early ages built a bridge, did a great deed in times when
roads were rare; hence the great priest was called the Pontifex.

Another spell for the purpose of averting the effects of the evil eye
is as follows: The mother of the overlooked child fills her mouth with
salt water, and lets it drop or trickle on the limbs of the infant,
and when this has been done, repeats:--


   "Miseç yákhá tut dikhen
    Sár páñori--
    Mudaren!
    Náshvalipen prejia:
    Andral t'ro shero
    Andral t're kolyin,
    Andral t're por
    Andral t're punrá
    Andral t're vástá
    Kathe prejánen,--
    Andre yákhá yon jánen!"

   "False (evil) eyes see thee,
    Like this water
    May they perish!
    Sickness depart
    From thy head,
    From thy breast,
    From thy belly,
    From thy feet,
    From thy hands,
    May they go hence
    Into the evil eyes!"


It may be observed that meal forms an ingredient in several of these
sorceries. It is a very ancient essential to sacrifices, and is offered
to the spirits of the stream to appease them, as it was often given
for the same purpose to the wind. The old Germans, says Prætorius,
imagined the storm-wind as a starving, ravenous being, and sought to
appease it by throwing meal to it. So it happened once even of later
years near Bamberg when a mighty wind was raging one night that an
old woman took her meal-bag and threw its contents out of the window,
saying:--


   "Lege dich, lieber Wind,
    Bringe dies deinem Kind!"

   "Dear Wind, be not so wild,
    Take that unto thy child!"


"In which thing," adds the highly Protestant Prætorius ("Anthropodemus
Plutonicus," p. 429), "she was like the Papists who would fain appease
the Donnerwetter, or thunderstorms, with the sound of baptized bells,
as though they were raging round like famished lions, or grim wolves,
or a soldier foraging, seeking what they may devour." The Wind here
represents the Wild Hunter, or the Storm, the leader of the Wüthende
Heer, or "raging army," who, under different names, is the hero of
so many German legends.

That the voice of the wind should seem like that of wild beasts
roaring for food would occur naturally enough to any one who was
familiar with both.

When a child refuses the breast the gypsies believe that a Pçuvus-wife,
or a female spirit of the earth has secretly sucked it. In such
a case they place between the mother's breasts onions, and repeat
these words:--


   "Pçuvushi, Pçuvushi,
    Ac tu náshvályi
    Tiro tçud ac yakhá,
    Andre pçuv tu pçábuvá!
    Thávdá, thávdá miro tçud,
    Thávdá, thávdá, parno tçud,
    Thávdá, thávdá, sár kámáv,--
    Mre cáveske bokhale!"

   "Earth-spirit! Earth-spirit!
    Be thou ill.
    Let thy milk be fire!
    Burn in the earth!
    Flow, flow, my milk!
    Flow, flow, white milk!
    Flow, flow, as I desire
    To my hungry child!"


The same is applied when the milk holds back or will not flow, as
it is then supposed that a Pçuvus-wife has secretly suckled her own
child at the mother's breast. It is an old belief that elves put
their own offspring in the place of infants, whom they sometimes
steal. This subject of elf-changelings is extensively treated by
all the writers on witchcraft. There is even a Latin treatise, or
thesis, devoted to defining the legal and social status, rights,
&c., of such beings. It is entitled, "De Infantibus Supposititiis,
vulgo Wechsel-Bälgen," Dresden, 1678. "Such infants," says the author
(John Valentine Merbitz), "are called Cambiones, Vagiones (à continuo
vagitu), Germanis Küllkräpfe, Wechselkinder, Wechselbälge, all of
which indicates, in German belief, children which have nothing human
about them except the skin."

When the child is subject to convulsive weeping or spasms, and loses
its sleep, the mother takes a straw from the child's sleeping-place
and puts into her mouth. Then, while she is fumigated with dried
cow-dung, into which the hair of the father and mother have been
mingled, she chants:--


   "Bala, bálá pçubuven,
    Cik te bálá pçubuven,
    Cik te bálá pçubuven,
    Pçábuvel náshvályipen!"

   "Hair, hair, burn!
    Dirt and hair burn!
    Dirt and hair burn!
    Illness be burned!"


This bears manifest mark of Hindoo origin, and I have no doubt that
the same ceremony in every detail is practised in India at the present
day. In Southern Hungary convulsive weeping in children is cured
as follows: In the evening, when the fire burns before the tent,
the mother takes her child in her arms and carries it three times
around the fire, putting on it a pipkin full of water, into which she
puts three coals. With this water she washes the head of her child,
and pours some of it on a black dog. Then she goes to the next stream
or brook, and lets fall into it a red twist, saying:--


   "Lává Niváshi ádá bolditori te láhá m're caveskro rovipen! Káná
    sástavestes ánáv me tute pçábáyá te yándrá."

   "Nivashi take this twist, and with it the weeping of my child. When
    it is well I will bring thee apples and eggs."


When a child "bumps" its head the swelling is pressed with the blade
of a knife, and the following spell is muttered thrice, seven, or
nine times, according to the gravity of the injury:--


   "Ac tu, ac tu, ac kovles,
    The may sik tu mudarés!
    Andre pcuv tu jiá,
    Dikav tut me ñikáná!
    Shuri, shuri, áná,
    De pal pçuv!"

   "Be thou, be thou, be thou weak (i.e., soft)
    and very soon perish!
    Go thou into the earth,
    May I see thee never more!
    Bring knives, knives,
    Give (i.e., put) into the earth."


Then the knife is stuck three, seven, or nine times into the earth. If
the child or a grown person has a bleeding at the nose, some of the
blood is covered with earth, and the following verse repeated:--


   "Pçuvush, dáv tute
    Pçuvush, lává mánge,
    De tre cáveske
    Hin may táte!
    Sik lava!"

   "Pcuvus, I give to thee,
    Pcuvus, oh take from me,
    Give it to thy child,
    It is very warm,
    Take it quickly!"


If the child has pains in the stomach, the hair of a black dog is
burned to powder and kneaded with the mother's milk and some of
the fæces of the child into a paste. This prescription occurs in the
magical medical formulas of Marcellus Burdigalenis, the court-physician
at Rome in the fourth century: "Cape mel atticum et stercus infantis
quod primum demittit, statim ex lacte mulieris quoe puerum allactat
permiscebis et sic inunges," &c. Most of the prescriptions of Marcellus
were of ancient Etrurian origin, and I have found many of them still
in use in the Romagna Toscana. This is put into a cloth and bound
on the belly of the child. When it falls asleep a hole is bored in
a tree and the paste put into it. The hole is then stopped up with a
wooden plug, and while this is being done the following is repeated:--


   "Andrál por prejiá,
    André selene beshá!
    Beshá beshá tu káthe!
    Penáv, penáv me tute!"

   "Depart from the belly
    Live in the green! (tree)
    Remain, remain thou here!
    I say, I say to thee!"


The black dog is in many countries associated with sorcery and
diabolical influences, and "in European heathendom it was an emblem
of the evil principle. The black demon Cernobog was represented by
the Slavs as a black dog. Among the Wallachians there is a horrible
vampire-like creature called Priccolitsh, or Priculics, who appears
as a man in fine healthy condition, but by night he becomes a dog,
kills people by the mere touch, and devours them." The black dogs of
Faust and of Cornelius Agrippa will occur to most readers.

Gypsies have always been regarded as sorcerers and child-stealers,
and it is remarkable that Lilith, the mother of all witchcraft,
did the same. At the present day the Slavonian gypsies have spells
against such a spirit.

In the Chaldæan magic, as set forth by Lenormant, as I have already
stated, the powers of evil are incarnate diseases, they are seven
in number, and they are invoked by means of verses which bear an
extraordinary resemblance to those which are still current in Italy
as well as in other countries. According to some writers this is all
mere chance coincidence, or due to concurrent causes and similar
conditions in different countries. That diseases, like hunger, or
death, or the terrors of the night, may have been incarnated as evil
spirits naturally by all mankind may be granted, but when we find them
arranged in categories of numbers, in widely different countries,
employing the same means of banishing them--that is, by short songs
and drum-beating--when we find these incantations in the same general
forms, often with the same words, our belief as to the identity of
origin is confirmed at every step. We can admit that the Jews were
in Babylon and wandered thence all over the world, but that any other
religious or superstitious system should have done the same would be
obstinately denied. And by an incredible inconsistency, scholars who
admit the early migrations of whole races on a vast scale, from the
remotest regions of the East to Western Europe, deny that legends
and myths come with them or that they could have spread in like manner.

One of the attributes of the witch of the Middle Ages in which she has
been confused with the Queen of the Fairies, and fairies in general, is
that she steals newly-born children. This is a very ancient attribute
of the female demon or sorceress or strega, and it is found among Jews
at the present day who believe in the Benemmerinnen, or witches who
haunt women in childbirth as well as in Lilith. "The Jews banish this
first wife of Adam by writing on the walls, 'Adam chava chuz Lilith,'
('Keep away from here, Lilith!')" ("Anthropodemus Plutonicus," by
John Prætorius, 1666). That it is very ancient is rendered probable
because the famous Bogomile formula of incantation against the
twelve fever-fits (Tresevica), or kinds of fever, turns entirely on
the legend of six children stolen by the demon who is compelled to
restore them. Here we have the very oldest form of witchcraft known,
that is incarnate disease in numbers allied to child-stealing. This
spell of the Tresevica is attributed, says Dr. Gaster, to Pope
Jeremia, the founder of Bogomilism (the great Oriental Slavonian
heresy which spread over Europe in the Middle Ages and prepared the
way for Protestanism). "There is no doubt, therefore, that the spell
is derived from the East, and I have elsewhere proved its existence
in that quarter as early as the eighth century. It may have been of
Manichæan origin. It has been preserved up to the present day in all
the lands of Eastern Europe and, with certain modifications, exists
among Germans and Jews." Though attributed to Sisynios, the immediate
follower of Manes, as chief of the Manichæans, it seems to have been
derived from an earlier Oriental tale which became the basis of all
later formulæ. I give it here in the Roumanian form, which closely
resembles the old one. Here, as in all the other variants, the demon
is a feminine one. The following is the legend:--


   "I, Sisveas, I came down from the Mount of Olives, saw the
    Archangel Gabriel as he met the Avestitza, wing of Satan, and
    seized her by the hair and asked her where she was going. And she
    answered that she was going to cheat the holy Virgin by her tricks,
    steal the new-born child, and drink its blood. The archangel asked
    her how she could get into houses so as to steal the children,
    and she answered that she changed herself into a fly or a cat or
    such forms. But whosoever knew her twelve and a half (nineteen)
    names and wrote them out she could not touch. She told him these
    names, and they were written down."


There is a Coptic as well as a Greek parallel to this. The fairy who
steals the children is called Lilith, and is further identified with
Herodias and her twelve daughters as personifications of different
kinds of fever. This is extremely interesting, as it casts some light
on a question which has greatly puzzled all writers on witchcraft as
to how or why Herodias was so generally worshipped in company with
Diana by witches as a goddess in Italy. This is mentioned by Pipernus,
Grillandus, Mirandola, and Horst. The name is probably much older
than that of the Herodias of the New Testament.








CHAPTER IV.

SOUTH SLAVONIAN AND OTHER GYPSY WITCH-LORE.--THE WORDS FOR A
WITCH--VILAS AND THE SPIRITS OF EARTH AND AIR--WITCHES, EGG-SHELLS,
AND EGG-LORE--EGG PROVERBS--OVA DE CRUCIBUS.


There is current in the whole of the Southern Slavonian provinces a
vast mass of legends and other lore relating to witches, which, in the
opinion of Dr. Friedrich S. Krauss, may also be regarded as Romany,
since it is held in common with the gypsies. There can, indeed, be
very little doubt that most of it was derived from, or disseminated
by, them, since they have been the principal masters in magic and
doctors in medicine in the Slavonic lands for many centuries. There
are others deeply learned in this subject who share the same opinion,
it being certain that the gypsies could hardly have a separate lore for
themselves and one for magic practices on others, and I entertain no
doubt that they are substantially the same; but to avoid possible error
and confusion, I give what I have taken in this kind from Dr. Krauss
[10] and others by itself.

As the English word witch, Anglo-Saxon Wicca, comes from a
root implying wisdom, [11] so the pure Slavonian word vjestica,
Bulgarian, vjescirica (masculine, viestae), meant originally the
one knowing or well informed, and it has preserved the same power
in allied languages, as Veaa (New Slovenish), knowledge, Vedavica,
a fortune-teller by cards, Viedma (Russian), a witch, and Vedwin,
fatidicus. In many places, especially in Dalmatia, witches are more
gently or less plainly called Krstaca, the crossed, from Krst, a cross,
i.e., christos, or Rogulja, "horned," derived from association with
the horns of devils. In Croatia the Italian Striga is used, while
among the Slovenes and Kai-Kroats the term copernica (masculine,
coprnjak). "But it enrages the witches so much to be called by
this word that when they hear that any one has used it they come
to his house by night and tear him in four pieces, which they cast
afar into the four quarters of the earth, yea, and thereunto carry
away all the swine, horses, and cattle, so intolerable is their
wrath." Therefore men use the word hmana zena, or "common woman,"
hmana being the Slavonic pronunciation of the German word gemein, or
common. In Dalmatia and far into Servia a witch is called macisnica,
and magic, macija, which is, evidently enough, the Italian magia. But
there are witches and witches, and it appears that among the learned
the vjestica differs from the macionica, and this from the Zlokobnica
who, as the "evil-meeter," or one whom it is unlucky to encounter in
the morning, is probably only one who has the evil eye. A quotation
from a Servian authority, given by Dr. Krauss, is as follows:--


   "I have often heard from old Hodzas and Kadijas, that every female
    Wallach, as soon as she is forty years old, abandons the 'God be
    with us!' and becomes a witch (vjestica), or at least a zlokobnica
    or macionica. A real witch has a mark of a cross under her nose, a
    zlokobnica has some hairs of a beard, and a macionica may be known
    by a forehead full of dark folds (frowns), with blood-spots in her
    face" ("Niz srpskih pripoviedaka. Vuk. vit. Vecevica. Pancevo,"
    p, 93. 1881).


Of the great number of South Slavonian terms for the verb to enchant
or bewitch, it may suffice to say that the commencement, carati,
cari carani, carovnik, &c., appear to have much more affinity to
the gypsy chor-ava, to steal or swindle, and chov-hani, a witch,
than to the Italian ciarlatano, and the French and English charlatan,
from which Dr. Krauss derives them.




THE VILAS-SYLVANA ELEMENTARY SPIRITS.

Among the Slavonic and gypsy races all witchcraft, fairy- and
Folk-lore rests mainly upon a belief in certain spirits of the wood and
wold, of earth and water, which has much in common with that of the
Rosicrucians and Paracelsus, but much more with the gypsy mythology
(as given by Wlislocki, "Vom Wandernden Zigeunervolke," pp. 49-309),
which is apparently in a great measure of directly Indian origin.

"In the Vile" says Dr. Krauss, "also known as Samovile, Samodivi,
and Vilevrjaci, we have near relations to the forest and field
spirits, or the 'wood-' and 'moss-folk' of Middle Germany, France,
and Bavaria; the 'wild people' of Eifel, Hesse, Salzburg, and the
Tyrol; the wood-women and wood-men of Bohemia; the Tyrolese Fanggen,
Fänken, Nörkel, and Happy Ladies; the Roumanish Orken, Euguane,
and Dialen; the Danish Ellekoner; the Swedish Skogsnufvaz; and the
Russian Ljesje; while in certain respects they have affinity with the
Teutonic Valkyries." Yet they differ on the whole from all of these,
as from English fairies, in being more like divinities, who exert a
constant and familiar influence for good or evil on human beings, and
who are prayed to or exorcised on all occasions. They have, however,
their exact parallel among the Red Indians of North America as among
the Eskimo, and it is evident that they are originally derived from
the old or primeval Shamanic faith, which once spread all over the
earth. It is very true, as Dr. Krauss remarks, that in the West of
Europe it is becoming almost impossible to trace this true origin of
spirits now regarded as merely diabolical, or otherwise put into new
rôles; but among the South Slavonians and gypsies we can still find
them in very nearly their old form and playing the same parts. We can
still find the Vila as set forth in old ballads, the incarnation of
beauty and power, the benevolent friends of sufferers, the geniuses
of heroes, the dwellers by rock and river and greenwood tree. But
they are implacable in their wrath to all who deceive them, or who
break a promise; nay, they inflict terrible punishment even on those
who disturb their rings or the dances which they make by midsummer
moonlight. Hence the proverb applied to any man who suddenly fell ill:
"Naiso je na vilinsko kolo" ("He stepped on a fairy-ring"). From this
arbitrary exercise of power we find the Vila represented at times as
a spirit who punishes and torments.

Thus we are told that there was once a shepherd named Stanko, who
played beautifully on the flute. One evening he was so absorbed in
his own music that when the Ave Maria bell rung, instead of repeating
the prayer he played it. As he ended he saw a Vila sitting on a
hedge. And from that hour she never left him. By table, by his bed,
at work or play, the white form and unearthly eyes of the spirit were
close to him.


   "By a spell to him unknown,
    He could never be alone."


Witches and wizards were summoned to aid him, but to no avail; nay,
it made matters worse, for the Vila now often beat him, and when
people asked him why it was, he replied that the Vila did so because
he refused to wander out into the world with her. And yet again he
would be discovered in the top of a tree, bound with bast; and so it
went on for years, till he was finally found one morning drowned in
a ditch. So in the Wolf Dietrich legend the hero refuses the love
of die rauhe Else, and is made mad by the witch and runs wild. All
of which is identical with what is told in an Algonkin tale (vide
"The Algonkin Legends of New England").

There are three kinds of witches or spirits among the Southern
Slavonians which correspond in every respect exactly to those in
which the gypsies believe. The first of these are the Zracne Vile,
or aerial spirits. These, like the spirits of the air of Scripture,
are evily-disposed to human beings, playing them mischievous tricks
or inflicting on them fatal injuries. They lead them astray by night,
like Friar Rush and Robin Goodfellow, or the English gypsy Mullo doods,
or bewilder and frighten them into madness. Of the second kind are the
Earth spirits, Pozemne Vile, in gypsy Pcuvushi or Puvushi. These are
amiable, noble, and companionable beings, who often give sage counsel
to men. Thirdly are the Water sprites, in Slavonic Povodne Vile,
in gypsy Nivashi, who are to the highest degree vindictive at times,
yet who behave kindly to men when they meet them on land. But woe to
those who, while swimming, encounter them in streams or lakes, for
then the goblins grasp and whirl them about until they perish. From
this account by Dr. Krauss, it appears as if this Slavonic mythology
were derived from the gypsy, firstly, because it is more imperfect
than the latter, and secondly, because in it Vilas, or spirits,
are confused with witches, while among the gypsies they are clearly
separated and distinctly defined.

Dr. Wlislocki says ("Vom Wand. Zigeunervolke," p. 253) that "gypsies
are still a race given to Shamanism, but yet they reverence a
highest being under the name of devla or del." This is, however,
the case to-day with all believers in Shaman or Sorcery-religion, the
difference between them and monotheists being that this highest god
is little worshipped or even thought of, all practical devotion being
paid to spirits who are really their saints. By close examination the
Gypsy religion, like that of the country-folk in India, appears to
be absolutely identical in spirit with that of American Indians. And
I should say that the monk mentioned by Prætorius, who declared
that though God and Christ should damn him, yet he could be saved
by appealing to Saint Joseph, was not very far removed from being
a Shamanist.

The Hungarian gypsies are divided into tribes, and one of these,
the Kukaya, believes itself to be descended from the Pçuvushi, or
earth-fairies, according to the following story, narrated by Dr. H. von
Wlislocki in his paper on the genealogy and family relations of the
Transylvanian Tent Gypsies:--


   "Many thousand years ago there were as yet in the world very
    few Pchuvushi. These are beings of human form dwelling under
    the earth. There they have cities, but they very often come to
    the world above. They are ugly, and their men are covered with
    hair. (All of this indicates a prehistoric subterranean race
    like the Eskimo, fur-clad. [12]) They carry off mortal girls for
    wives. Their life is hidden in the egg of a black hen."


This is the same as that of the Orco or Ogre in the Italian tale, "I
Racconti delle Fate, Cesare da Causa," Florence, 1888. Whoever kills
the hen and throws the egg into a running stream, kills the pchuvush.


   "Once a young Pchuvush woman came up to the world and sat in a
    fair green forest. She saw a very beautiful youth sleeping in
    the shade, and said: 'What happiness it must be to have such a
    husband. Mine is so ugly!' Her husband, who had stolen silently
    after her, heard this, and reflected: 'What a good idea it would
    be to lend my wife to this young man till she shall have borne a
    family of beautiful children! Then I could sell them to my rich
    Pchuvus friends.' So he said to his wife: 'You may live with
    this youth for ten years if you will promise to give me either
    the boys or the girls which you may bear to him.' She agreed to
    this. Then the Pchuvus began to sing:--

      "'Kuku, kukáya
        Kames to adala?
        Kuku, kukaya.'

   "That is in English:--

      "'Kuku, kukaya
        Do you want this (one) here?
        Kuku, kukaya.'

   "Then the young man awoke, and as the goblin offered him much gold
    and silver with his wife, he took her and lived with her ten years,
    and every year she bore him a son. Then came the Pchuvush to get
    the children. But the wife said she had chosen to keep all the
    sons, and was very sorry but she had no girls to give him! So he
    went away sorrowfully, howling:--

      "'Kuku, kukáya!
        Ada kin jirklá!
        Kuku, kukaya!'

   "That is to say:--

      "'Kuku, kukaya!
        These are dogs here!
        Kuku, kukaya!'

   "Then the ten boys laughed and said to their father: 'We will
    call ourselves Kukaya.' And so from them came the race."


Dr. Wlislocki points out that there are races which declare themselves
to be descended from dogs, or, like the Romans, from wolves. It is
a curious coincidence that the Eskimo are among the former.

In all parts of Eastern Europe, as in the West, many people are not
only careful to burn the parings of their nails [13] and the combings
of hair, for fear lest witches and imps should work sorcery with them
to the injury of those from whom they came, but they also destroy the
shells of eggs when they have eaten their contents. So A. Wuttke tells
us in his book, "Der Deutsche Volks Aberglaube der Gegenwart," 1869:
"When one has eaten eggs the shells must be broken up or burned,
or else the hens will lay no more, or evil witches will come over
them." And in England, Spain, the Netherlands, or Portugal, there are
many who believe or say that if the witches can get such shells from
which people have eaten, unbroken, they can, by muttering spells,
cause them to grow so large that they can use them as boats. Dom
Leitas Ganet ("Dona Branca ou a Conquista do Algarve," Paris, 1826),
however, assures us that is a very risky thing for the witches, because
if they do not return home before midnight the shell-boat perishes,
"whence it hath come to pass that many of these sorceresses have been
miserably drowned."

However, an egg hung up in a house is a lucky amulet, hence the
ostrich eggs and cocoanuts resembling them which are so common in the
East. And it is to be observed that every gypsy in England declares
that a pivilioi, or cocoanut, as a gift brings bak or luck, I myself
having had many given to me with this assurance. This is evidently
and directly derived from India, in which country there are a mass
of religious traditions referring to it.


   "Once there was a gypsy girl who noticed that when anybody ate
    eggs they broke up the shells, and asking why this was done
    received for answer:--

  "'You must break the shell to bits for fear
    Lest the witches should make it a boat, my dear.
    For over the sea away from home,
    Far by night the witches roam.'


"Then the girl said: 'I don't see why the poor witches should not
have boats as well as other people.' And saying this she threw the
shell of an egg which she had been eating as far as she could, and
cried, 'Chovihani, lav tro bero!' ('Witch--there is your boat!') But
what was her amazement to see the shell caught up by the wind and
whirled away on high till it became invisible, while a voice cried,
'Paraka!' ('I thank you!')

"Now it came to pass some time after that the gypsy girl was on an
island, where she remained some days. And when she wished to return,
behold a great flood was rising, and it had washed her boat away, she
could see nothing of it. But the water kept getting higher and higher,
and soon there was only a little bit of the island above the flood,
and the girl thought she must drown. Just then she saw a white boat
coming; there sat in it a woman with witch eyes; she was rowing with
a broom, and a black cat sat on her shoulder. 'Jump in!' she cried
to the girl, and then rowed her to the firm land.

"When she was on the shore the woman said: 'Turn round three times
to the right and look every time at the boat.' She did so, and every
time she looked she saw the boat grow smaller till it was like an
egg. Then the woman sang:--


  "'That is the shell you threw to me,
    Even a witch can grateful be.'


"Saying this she vanished, cat, broom, shell, and all.


   "Now my story is fairly done,
    I beg you to tell a better one."


As regards these boats which grow large or small at will we find them
in the Norse ship Skidbladnir, which certain dwarfs made and gave to
Frey. It is so large that all the gods and their army can embark in
it. But when not in use it may be so contracted that one may hava i
pungi sino--put it in his purse or pocket. The Algonkin god Glooskap
has not only the counterpart of Skidbladnir, but the hammer of Thor
and his belt of strength. He has also the two attendant birds which
bring him news, and the two wolves which mean Day and Night.

Another legend given by Dr. Krauss, relative to witches and egg-shells
is as follows:--


   "By the Klek lived a rich tavern-keeper and his wife. He was thin
    and lean--hager und mager--while she was as fat as a well-fed pig.

   "One day there came a gypsy woman by. She began to tell his
    fortune by his hand. And as she studied it seriously she became
    herself serious, and then said to him, 'Listen, you good-natured
    dolt (moré)! Do you know why you are so slim and your wife so
    stout?' 'Not I.' 'My good friend (Latcho pral), your wife is
    a witch. Every Friday when there is a new moon (mladi petak)
    she rides you up along the Klek to the devil's dance' (Uraze
    kolo). 'How can that be?' 'Simply enough. As soon as you fall
    asleep, she slips a magic halter over your head. Then you become a
    horse, and she rides you over the hills and far away over mountains
    and woods, cities and seas, to the witches' gathering.

      "'Little you know where you have been,
        Little you think of what you have seen,

  "'For when you awake it is all forgotten, but the ride is hard
    for you, and you are wasting away, and dying. Take great care of
    yourself on the next Friday when there is a new moon!'

   "So the gypsy went her way, and he thought it over. On the
    next Friday when the moon was new he went to bed early, but
    only pretended to sleep. Then his wife came silently as a cat
    to the bed-side with the magic halter in her hand. As quick as
    lightning he jumped up, snatched it from her, and threw it over
    her head. Then she became, in a second, a mare. He mounted her,
    and away she flew through the air--over hills and dales like the
    wind, till they came to the witches' meeting.

   "He dismounted, bound the mare to a tree, and, unseen by the
    company, watched them at a little distance. All the witches carried
    pots or jars. First they danced in a ring, then every one put
    her pot on the ground and danced alone round it. And these pots
    were egg-shells.

   "While he watched, there came flying to him a witch in whom
    he recognized his old godmother. 'How did you come here?' she
    inquired. 'Well, I came here on my mare, I know not how.' 'Woe
    to you--begone as soon as possible. If the witches once see you
    it will be all up with you. Know that we are all waiting for one'
    (this one was his wife), 'and till she comes we cannot begin.' Then
    the landlord mounted his mare, cried 'Home!' and when he was
    there tied her up in the stable and went to bed.

   "In the morning his servant-man said to him: 'There is a mare in
    the stable.' 'Yes,' replied the master; 'it is mine.' So he sent
    for a smith, and made him shoe the mare. Now, whatever is done
    to a witch while she is in the form of an animal remains on or
    in her when she resumes her natural shape.

   "Then he went out and assembled a judicial or legal commission. He
    led the members to his house, told them all his story, led forth
    the mare, and took off the halter. She became a woman as before,
    but horse-shoes were affixed to her feet and hands. She began to
    weep and wail, but the judge was pitiless. He had her thrown into
    a pit full of quicklime, and thus she was burnt to death. And
    since that time people break the shells of eggs after eating
    their contents, lest witches should make jars or pots of them."


The following story on the same subject is from a different source:--


   "There was once a gypsy girl who was very clever, and whenever
    she heard people talk about witches she remembered it well. One
    day she took an egg-shell and made a small round hole in it very
    neatly, and ate the yolk and white, but the shell she put on a
    heap of white sand by a stream, where it was very likely to be
    seen. Then she hid herself behind a bush. By and by, when it was
    night, there came a witch, who, seeing the shell, pronounced a
    word over it, when it changed to a beautiful boat, into which
    the witch got and sailed on the water, over the sea.

   "The girl remembered the word, and soon ate another egg and turned
    it into a boat. Whenever she willed it went over the world to
    places where fruit and flowers abounded, or where people gave her
    much gold for such things as knives and scissors. So she grew rich
    and had a fine house. The boat she hid away carefully in a bush.

   "There was a very envious, wicked woman, whom the girl had
    befriended many a time, and who hated her all the more for it. And
    this creature set to work, spying and sneaking, to find out the
    secret of the girl's prosperity. And at last she discovered the
    boat, and, suspecting something, hid herself in the bush hard by
    to watch.

   "By and by the girl came with a basket full of wares for her
    trade, and, drawing out the boat, said, 'To Africa!'--when off
    it flew. The woman watched and waited. After a few hours the girl
    returned. Her boat was full of fine things, ostrich feathers and
    gold, fruit and strange flowers, all of which she carried into
    her house.

   "Then the woman put the boat on the water, and said, 'To
    Africa!' But she did not know the word by means of which it was
    changed from an egg-shell, and which made it fly like thought. So
    as it went along the woman cried, 'Faster!' but it never heeded
    her. Then she cried again in a great rage, and at last exclaimed,
   'In God's name get on with you!' Then the spell was broken, and
    the boat turned into an egg-shell, and the woman was drowned in
    the great rolling sea."


Egg-lore is inexhaustible. The eggs of Maundy Thursday (Witten
Donnertag), says a writer in The Queen, protect a house against thunder
and lightning, but, in fact, an egg hung up is a general protection,
hence the ostrich eggs and cocoanuts of the East. Some other very
interesting items in the communication referred to are as follows:--


   "Witches and Eggs.--'To hang an egg laid on Ascension Day in the
    roof of a house,' says Reginald Scot in 1584, 'preserveth the
    same from all hurts.' Probably this was written with an eye to the
   'hurts' arising from witchcraft, in connection with which eggs were
    supposed to possess certain mysterious powers. In North Germany,
    if you have a desire to see the ladies of the broomstick on May
    Day, their festival, you must take an egg laid on Maundy Thursday,
    and stand where four roads meet; or else you must go into church
    on Good Friday, but come out before the blessing. It was formerly
    quite an article of domestic belief that the shells must be broken
    after eating eggs, lest the witches should sail out to sea in them;
    or, as Sir Thomas Browne declared, lest they 'should draw or prick
    their names therein, and veneficiously mischief' the person who
    had partaken of the egg. North Germans, ignoring this side of the
    question, say, 'Break the shells or you will get the ague;' and
    Netherlanders advise you to secure yourself against the attacks
    of this disagreeable visitor by eating on Easter Day a couple of
    eggs which were laid on Good Friday.

   "Scottish Superstitions.--Scotch fishers, who may be reckoned
    among the most superstitious of folks, believe that contrary
    winds and much consequent vexation of spirit will be the result of
    having eggs on board with them; while in the west of England it
    is considered very unlucky to bring birds' eggs into the house,
    although they may be hung up with impunity outside. Mr. Gregor,
    in his 'Folklore of the North-East of Scotland,' gives us some
    curious particulars concerning chickens, and the best methods of
    securing a satisfactory brood. The hen, it seems, should be set on
    an odd number of eggs, or the chances are that most, if not all,
    will be addled--a mournful prospect for the henwife; also they
    must be placed under the mother bird after sunset, or the chickens
    will be blind. If the woman who performs this office carries the
    eggs wrapped up in her chemise, the result will be hen birds; if
    she wears a man's hat, cocks. Furthermore, it is as well for her
    to repeat a sort of charm, 'A' in thegeethir, A' oot thegeethir.'

   "Unlucky Eggs.--There are many farmers' wives, even in the present
    day, who would never dream of allowing eggs to be brought into
    the house or taken out after dark--this being deemed extremely
    unlucky. Cuthbert Bede mentions the case of a farmer's wife in
    Rutland who received a setting of ducks' eggs from a neighbour at
    nine o'clock at night. 'I cannot imagine how she could have been so
    foolish,' said the good woman, much distressed, and her visitor,
    upon inquiry, was told that ducks' eggs brought into a house
    after sunset would never be hatched. A Lincolnshire superstition
    declares that if eggs are carried over running water they will be
    useless for setting purposes; while in Aberdeen there is an idea
    prevalent among the country folks that should it thunder a short
    time before chickens are hatched, they will die in the shell. The
    same wiseacres may be credited with the notion that the year the
    farmer's gudewife presents him with an addition to his family
    is a bad season for the poultry yard. 'Bairns an' chuckens,'
    say they, 'dinna thrive in ae year.' The probable explanation
    being that the gudewife, taken up with the care of her bairn,
    has less time to attend to the rearing of the 'chuckens.'

   "Fortune-telling in Northumberland.--Besides the divination
    practised with the white of an egg, which certainly appears
    of a vague and unsatisfactory character, another species of
    fortune-telling with eggs is in vogue in Northumberland on the eve
    of St. Agnes. A maiden desirous of knowing what her future lord
    is like, is enjoined to boil an egg, after having spent the whole
    day fasting and in silence, then to extract the yolk, fill the
    cavity with salt, and eat the whole, including the shell. This
    highly unpalatable supper finished, the heroic maid must walk
    backwards, uttering this invocation to the saint:--

      "'Sweet St. Agnes, work thy fast,
        If ever I be to marry man,
        Or man be to marry me,
        I hope him this night to see.'"


Friedrich and others assert that the saying in Luke xi. 12--"Or if he
shall ask an egg shall he give him a scorpion?"--is a direct reference
to ancient belief that the egg typified the good principle, and the
scorpion evil, and which is certainly supported by a cloud of witnesses
in the form of classic folk-lore. The egg, as a cosmogenic symbol, and
indicating the origin of all things, finds a place in the mythologies
of many races. These are indicated with much erudition by Friedrich,
"Symbolik der Natur," p. 686.

In Lower Alsatia it is believed that if a man will take an Easter egg
into the church and look about him, if there be any witches in the
congregation he may know them by their having in their hands pieces
of pork instead of prayer-books, and milk-pails on their heads for
bonnets (Wolf, "Deutsche Mährchen und Sagen," p. 270). There is also
an ancient belief that an egg built into a new building will protect
it against evil and witchcraft. Such eggs were found in old houses in
Altenhagen and Iserlohen, while in the East there is a proverb, "the
egg of the chamber" ("Hamasa" of Abu Temman, v. Rückert, Stuttgart,
1846), which seems to point to the same practice.

The Romans expressed a disaster by saying, "Ovum ruptum est" ("The
egg is smashed"). Among other egg-proverbs I find the following:--


    His eggs are all omelettes (French); i.e., broken up.

    Eggs in the pan give pancakes but nevermore chicks (Low German).

    Never a chicken comes from broken eggs (Low German).

    Bad eggs, bad chickens. Hence in America "a bad egg" for a man
    who is radically bad, and "a good egg" for the contrary.

    Eggs not yet laid are uncertain chickens; i.e., "Do not count
    your chickens before they are hatched."

    Tread carefully among eggs (German).

    The egg pretends to be cleverer than the hen.

    He waits for the eggs and lets the hen go.

    He who wants eggs must endure the clucking of the hen
    (Westphalian).

    He thinks his eggs are of more account than other people's hens.

    One rotten egg spoils all the pudding.

    Rotten eggs and bad butter always stand by one another; or "go
    well together."

        Old eggs, old lovers, and an old horse,
        Are either rotten or for the worse.

    (Original:

        Alte Eyer
        Alte Freier--
        Alter Gaul
        Sind meistens faul.)

   "All eggs are of the same size" (Eggs are all alike), he said,
    and grabbed the biggest.

    As like as eggs (Old Roman).

    As sure as eggs.

    His eggs all have two yolks.

    If you have many eggs you can have many cakes.

    He who has many eggs scatters many shells.

    To throw an egg at a sparrow.

    To borrow trouble for eggs not yet hatched.

    Half an egg is worth more than all the shell.

    A drink after an egg, and a leap after an apple.

    A rotten egg in his face.


In the early mythology, the egg, as a bird was hatched from it, and as
it resembled seeds, nuts, &c., from which new plants come, was regarded
as the great type of production. This survives in love-charms, as when
a girl in the Tyrol believes she can secure a man's love by giving
him a red Easter egg. This giving red eggs at Easter is possibly
derived from the ancient Parsees, who did the same at their spring
festival. Among the Christians the reproductive and sexual symbolism,
when retained, was applied to the resurrection of the body and the
immortality of the soul. Hence Easter eggs. And as Christ by His
crucifixion caused this, or originated the faith, we have the ova
de crucibus, the origin of which has puzzled so many antiquaries;
for the cross itself was, like the egg, a symbol of life, in earlier
times of reproduction, and in a later age of life eternal. These eggs
are made of a large size of white glass by the Armenian Christians.








CHAPTER V.

CHARMS OR CONJURATIONS TO CURE OR PROTECT ANIMALS.


From the earliest ages a drum or tambourine has formed such an
indispensable adjunct of Shamanic sorcery among Tartars, Lapps,
Samoyedes, Eskimo, and Red Indians, that, taking it with other
associations, I can hardly believe that it has not been transmitted
from one to the other. In Hungary the gypsies when they wish to
know if an invalid will recover, have recourse to the cováçanescro
buçlo (chovihanescro buklo) or "witch-drum." This is a kind of
rude tambourine covered with the skin of an animal, and marked with
stripes which have a special meaning. On this are placed from nine
to twenty-one seeds of the thorn-apple (stramonium). The side of the
drum is then gently struck with a little hammer, and according to the
position which the seeds take on the marks, the recovery or death of
the patient is predicted. The following is a picture of a gypsy drum
as given by Dr. Wlislocki.

The wood for this is cut on Whitsunday. A is turned towards the
fortune-teller; nine seeds are now thrown on the drum, and with
the left hand, or with a hammer held in it, the tambourine is
tapped. Should all the seeds come within the four lines all will
go well, especially if three come within a, d, e, f. If two roll
into the space between a, i, it is lucky for a woman, between i and
f for a man. But if nearly all fall outside of b, c, g, h, all is
unfavourable. The same divination is used to know whether animals
will get well, and where stolen property is concealed. All of this
corresponds exactly to the use of the same instrument by the Laplanders
for the same purposes. The thorn-apple is a very poisonous plant, and
the gypsies are said to have first brought it to England. This is not
true, but it is extremely possible that they used it in stupefying,
killing, and "bewitching." It is very much employed at present by
the Voodoo poisoners in America.

The Turks are a Tartar race, and the drum is used among them very
generally for magical purposes. I have one of these tambouri which,
I was assured when I bought it, was made for incantations. It is of a
diamond shape, has parchment on both sides, and is inscribed with the
name Allah, in Arabic, and the well-known double triangle of Solomon,
with the moon and star.

To keep domestic animals from straying or being stolen, or falling ill,
they are, when a gypsy first becomes their owner, driven up before a
fire by his tent. Then they are struck with a switch, which is half
blacked with coal, across the back, while the following is repeated:--


   "Ac tu, ac kathe!
    Tu hin mange!
    Te Nivasa the jiánen--
    Ná dikh tu ádálen!
    Trin lánca hin mánge,
    Me pçándáv tute:
    Yeká o devlá, ávri
    O Kristus, trite Maria!"

   "Stay thou, stay here!
    Thou art mine!
    And the Nivasi when they go--
    Thou shalt not see them!
    Three chains I have,
    I bind thee:
    One is God, the other (beyond)
    The Christ, the third, Maria!"


To charm a horse, they draw, with a coal, a ring on the left hoof
and on the right a cross, and murmur:--


   "Obles, obles te obles!
    Ac tu, ac tù máy sástes
    Ná th' ávehás beng tute
    Devlá, devlá ac tute!
    Gule devlá bishálá
    E gráyeskro perá
    Miseçescro dád!
    Niko mánushenge ác
    Káske me dáv, leske ac
    Shukáres tu ác,
    Voyesá te láccs ac,
    Ashunen eftá Pçuvuse:
    Eftá láncá hin mánge,
    Ferinen ádálá
    Táysá, táysá e pedá!"

   "Round, round, and round!
    Be thou, be thou very sound
    The devil shall not come to thee,
    God, God shall be with thee!
    Sweet God drive away
    From the horse's body
    The Father of Evil!
    Be to (go not to) any other man
    To whom I give (sell) unto him
    Be beautiful!
    Frolicsome and good,
    Seven spirits of earth hear!
    I have seven chains,
    Protect this animal
    Ever, ever!"


Then a piece of salted bread is given to the horse, and the owner
spits seven times into his eyes, by which he is supposed to lose
all fear for supernatural beings. According to the gypsies, horses,
especially black ones, can see beings which are invisible to human
eyes. I have known an old English gypsy who believed that dogs could
see ghosts when men could not. The mysterious manner in which dogs
and horses betray fear when there is apparently nothing to dread,
the howling of the former by night, and the wild rushes of the latter,
doubtless led to this opinion. The bread and salt will recall to the
reader the fact that the same was given at the ancient mysteries
apparently for the purpose of strengthening the neophyte so that
he should not fear the supernatural beings whom he was supposed
to meet. It is curious to find this peculiar form of the sacrament
administered to a horse. Another protective charm is common among the
Southern Hungarian gypsies. The dung of a she-goat dried and powdered
is sifted on a horse's back and this spell recited:--


   "Miseçes prejiá,
    Andrál t're perá!
    Trádá cik buscákri
    Miseçes perákri,--

    Andral punrá, andral dumno,
    Andral yákhá, andral kánná!
    Nevkerádyi av ákána,
    Ac tu, ac tu cá mánge:
    Ác tu, ác tu, ác káthe!"

   "Evil be gone
    From thy belly!
    Drive away she-goat's dung
    Evil from the belly,
    From the feet, from the back,
    From the eyes, from the ears!
    New-born be now,
    Be thou, be thou only mine:
    Stay thou, stay thou, stay here!"


There is evidently a relation here between the dung of the she-goat
and certain ancient symbols. Whatever was a sign of fruitfulness,
generation, or productiveness, whether it was set forth by the
generative organs, sexual passion, or even manure which fertilises,
was connected with Life which is the good or vital principle opposed to
death. As the goat was eminently a type of lechery, so the she-goat,
owing to the great proportion of milk which she yielded, set forth
abundance; hence the cornucopia of Amalthea, the prototype of the
she-goat Heidrun of the Northern mythology, who yielded every day
so much milk that all the Einheriar, or dwellers in Valhall, could
satisfy themselves therewith. [14] But the forms or deities indicating
life were also those which shielded and protected from evil, therefore
Here, the mother of life and of birth, had in Sparta a shrine where
she-goats were sacrificed to her, while at Canuvium the statue of Juno
Sospita (who was also Here), was covered with a she-goat's skin. It
is in the ancient sense of fertility identified with protection,
that the she-goat's dung is used to exorcise evil from the horse by
the gypsies. There is, in fact, in all of these charms and exorcisms
a great deal which evidently connects them with the earliest rites
and religions.

In the Hungarian gypsy-tribe of the Kukuya, the following method of
protecting horses is used: The animal is placed by the tent-fire and
there a little hole is dug before him into which ninefold grass and
some hairs from his mane and tail are put. Then his left fore-hoof
is traced on the ground, and the earth within it is carefully taken
out and shaken into the hole, while these lines are repeated:--


   "Yeká cunul yeká bál,
    Tute e bokh náñi sál,
    Ko tut corel, the merel
    Sar e bálá, cunulá,
    Pal e pçuv the yov ável!
    Pçuvus, adalen tute,
    Sástes gráy ác mánge!"

   "A straw, a hair!
    May you never be hungry!
    May he who steals you die!
    Like the hair and the straw,
    May he go to the ground!
    Earth, these things to thee!
    May a sound horse be mine!"


If the animal be a mare and it is desired that she shall be with foal,
they give her oats to eat out of an apron or a gourd, and say:--


   "Trin kánályá, trin jiuklá,
    Jiánen upre pláyá!
    Cábá, pçares hin perá!
    Trin kánályá, trin jiuklá
    Jiánen tele pláyá,
    É çevá ándrasaváren
    Yek cumut ándre çasáren,
    Tre perá sik pçáreven!"

   "Three asses, three dogs,
    Go up the hill!
    Eat, fill thy belly with young!
    Three asses, three dogs,
    Go down the hill,
    They close the holes,
    They put the moon in (them)
    Thy belly be soon fruitful!"


"The moon has here," remarks Wlislocki, "a phallic meaning, the
mention of the ass, and the use of the gourd and apron are symbols
of fertility. Vide De Gubernatis, 'Animals in Indian Mythology,'
in the chapter on the ass."

There is another formula for protecting and aiding cattle, which
is practised among other races besides that of the gypsies; as, for
instance, among the Slovacks of Northern Hungary. This I shall leave
in the original:--


   "Dieses Verwahrungsmittel besteht darin, dass dem gekauften
    weiblichen Thiere der Mann den blanken Hintern zeigt, einem
    männlichen Thiere aber eine weibliche Person. Hiebei werden die
    Worte gesagt:--

       "Sár o kár pál e punrá,
        Kiyá mánge ác táysá!

        Wie der Schwantz am Bein,
        Sollst du stets bei mir sein!"


Or else:--


   "Sár e minc pal e per,
    Kiyá mánge ác buter!

    Wie das Loch im Leib,
    Also bei mir bleib!"


To secure swine to their owner a hole is dug in the turf which is
filled with salt and charcoal dust, which is covered with earth,
and these words uttered:--


   "Adá hin tute
    Ná ává pál menge
    Dáv tute, so kámáv
    Pçuvusheyá, áshuná,
    Cores tuna muká
    Hin menge trin láncá,
    Trin máy láce Urmá,
    Ke ferinen men!"

   "This is thine,
    Come not to us!
    I give thee what I can
    Oh Spirit of earth, hear!
    Let not the thief go!
    We have three chains,
    Three very good fairies
    Who protect us."


If the swine find the hole and root it up--as they will be tolerably
certain to do owing to their fondness for salt and charcoal--they
will not be stolen or run away.

The Urmen, or Fairies, are supposed to be very favourable to
cattle, therefore children who torment cows are told "Urme tute ná
bica somnakune pçábáy"--"The fairies will not send you any golden
apples!" If the English gypsies had the word Urme (and it may be that
it exists among them even yet), this would be, "I Urme ná bitcher
tute sonnakai pábya!"

But the mighty charm of charms to protect cattle from theft is the
following: Three drops of blood are made to fall from the finger of a
little child on a piece of bread which is given to the animal to eat,
with these words:--


   "Dav tute trinen rátá
    Ternes te láces ávná!
    Ko tut corel, ádáleske
    Hin rát te más shutyárdye!

    Káná rátá te rátá
    Paltire per ávná,
    Yákh te yákh te báre yákh
    Sikoves çál te çál
    Ko kámel tut te çál!"

   "I give three (drops of) blood
    To become young and good;
    Who steals thee to him
    Shall be (is) blood and flesh dried up!

    When blood and blood
    Pass into thy belly,
    Fire and fire and great fire
    Shall devour and devour all
    Who will eat thee!"


This incantation takes us back to grim old heathenism with hints of
human sacrifice. When the thief was suspected or privately detected
it is probable that a dose of some burning poison made good the
prediction. "The word young" remarks Dr. Wlislocki, "may be here
understood to mean innocent, since, according to ancient belief, there
was a powerful magic virtue in the blood of virgins and of little
children. Every new tent is therefore sprinkled by the gypsies with
a few drops of a child's blood to protect it from magic or any other
accident." So in prehistoric times, and through the Middle Ages, a
human being was often walled up alive in the foundations of a castle
to insure its durability. (Vide P. Cassel, "Die Symbolik des Blutes,"
p. 157.)

When the wandering, or tent-gypsies, find that cattle are ill and do
not know the nature of the disease, they take two birds--if possible
quails, called by them bereçto or füryo--one of which is killed, but
the other, besprinkled with its blood, is allowed to fly away. With
what remains of the blood they sprinkle some fodder, which is put
before the animal, with the words:--


   "So ándre tu miseç hin
            Avri ává!
    Káthe ker ná ávlá,
            Miseçeske!
    Káná rátá ná ávná,
    Násvályipen ná ávná!
    Miseç, tu ávri ává,
    Ada ker ná láce;
    Dáv rátá me káthe!"

   "What in thee is evil
            Come forth!
    Here is no home
            For the evil one!
    When (drops of) blood come not,
    Sickness comes not,
    Thou evil one, come forth!'

   "Trin párne, trin kále,
    Trin tçule páshlajen káthe,
    Ko len hádjinel
    Ac kivá mánge!"

   "Three white, three black,
    Three fat lie together here.
    Whoever disturbs them
    Remain to me! (Be mine!)"


To insure pigs thriving by a new owner, some charcoal-dust is mingled
with their food and these words spoken:--


   "Nivaseske ná muká,
    The çál t're çábená!
    Miseç yákhá tut díkhen,
    The yon káthe mudáren,
    Tu atunci çábá len!"

   "Do not let the Nivasi
    Eat thy food,
    Evil eyes see thee,
    And they here shall perish,
    Then do thou eat them!"


As a particularly powerful conjuration against thieves, the owner
runs thrice, while quite naked, round the animal or object which he
wishes to protect, and repeats at every turn:--


   "Oh coreyá ná prejiá.
    Dureder ná ává!
    T're vástá, t're punrá
    Avená kirñodyá
    Te ádá pedá láves!"

   "Oh, thief, do not go,
    Further do not come!
    Thy hands, thy feet
    Shall decay
    If thou takest this animal!"


Another "thieves' benediction" is as follows: The owner goes at
midnight with the animal or object to be protected to a cross-roads,
and while letting fall on the ground a few hairs of the beast, or a
bit of the thing whatever it be, repeats:--


     "Ada hin tute,
      Ná ává pál menge,
      Dav tute, so kámáv;
      Pçuvuseyá áshuná!"

   "This home is not good,
    Here I give (thee) blood!"


"The gypsies call the quail the devil's bird (Ciriclo bengeskro),
and ascribe diabolic properties to it. (Vide Cassel, 6 and 162.) The
daughters of the Nivasi appear as quails in the fields by day, but
during the night they steal the corn. To keep them away it is held
good during sowing-time to place in each of the four corners of the
field, parts of a quail, or at least some of the feathers of a black
hen which has never laid an egg. This superstition is also current
among the Roumanian peasants of the Siebenbürgen."

The primitive meaning of the myth may perhaps be found in the Greek
tradition which regarded the quail, because it was a bird of passage,
as a type of revival of spring or of life. Hercules awakes from
his swoon when his companion Iolaus (from the Greek ioulos, youth),
holds a quail to his nose. Hercules suffered from epilepsy, for which
disease the ancients thought the brain of a quail was a specific. The
placing pieces of a quail, by the gypsies, in the corners of a field
when corn is sown, connects the bird with spring. Artemis, a goddess
of spring and life, was called by the Romans Ortygyia, from ortyx,
a quail. Therefore, as signifying new life, the quail became itself
a cure for many diseases. And it seems to be like the Wren, also a
bird of witchcraft and sorcery, or a kind of witch itself. It is a
protector, because, owing to its pugnacity, it was a type of pluck,
battle and victory. In Phoenicia it was sacrificed to Hercules, and
the Romans were so fanatical in regard to it that Augustus punished
a city-father for serving upon his table a quail which had become
celebrated for its prowess. And so it has become a devil's bird among
the gypsies because in the old time it was regarded as a devil of a
bird for fighting.

The gypsies are hardly to be regarded as Christians, but when they
wish to contend against the powers of darkness they occasionally
invoke Christian influences. If a cow gives bloody milk it is thought
to be caused by her eating Wachtelkraut, or quail weed, which is a
poison. In such a case they sprinkle the milk on a field frequented
by quails and repeat:--


   "Dav rátá tumenge
    Adá ná hin láce!
    Ráyeskro Kristeskro rátá
    Adá hin máy láce
    Adá hin ámenge!"

   "I give to you blood,
    Which is not good!
    The Lord Christ's blood
    Is truly good,
    That is ours!"


If a cow makes water while being milked, she is bewitched, and
it is well in such a case to catch some of the urine, mix it with
onion-peelings and the egg of a black hen. This is boiled and mixed
with the cow's food while these lines are repeated:--


   "Ko ándré hin, avriává,
    Trin Urma cingárden les,
    Trin Urma tráden les
    Andre yándengré ker
    Beshel yov ándre ker
    Hin leske máy yakhá,
    Hin leske máy páña!"

   "Who is within, let him come out!
    Three Urme call him,
    Three Urme drive him
    Into the egg-shell house,
    There he lives in the house;
    He has much fire,
    He has much water!"


Then half the shell of the egg of the black hen is thrown into a
running stream and the other half into a fire.

Next to the Nivasi and Pçuvuse, or spirits of earth and air, and human
sorcerers or witches, the being who is most dreaded as injuring cattle
is the Chagrin or Cagrino. These demons have the form of a hedgehog,
are of yellowish colour, and are half a yard in length, and a span
in breadth. "I am certain," says Wlislocki, "that this creature
is none other than the equally demoniac being called Harginn, still
believed in by the inhabitants of North-western India. (Vide Liebrecht,
p. 112, and Leitner, 'Results of a Tour in Dardistan Kashmir,' &c.,
vol. i. p. 13.) The exact identity of the description of the two, as
well as that of the name, prove that the gypsies brought the belief
from their Indian home." It may here be observed that the Indian name
is Harginn, and the true gypsy word is pronounced very nearly like
'Hágrin--the o being an arbitrary addition. The transposition of
letters in a word is extremely common among the Hindu gypsies. The
Chagrin specially torments horses, by sitting on their backs and
making water on their bodies. The next day they appear to be weary,
sad, sick, and weak, bathed in sweat, with their manes tangled. When
this is seen the following ceremony is resorted to: The horse is
tied to a stake which has been rubbed with garlic juice, then a red
thread is laid in the form of a cross on the ground, but so far from
the heels of the horse that he cannot disturb it. And while laying
it down the performer sings:--


   "Sáve miseç ac káthe,
    Ác ándre lunge táve,
    Andre leg páshader páñi.

    De tu tire páñi
    Andre çuca Cháriñeyá,
    Andre tu sik mudárá!"

   "All evil stay here,
    Stay in the long thread,
    In the next brook (water).
    Give thy water,
    Jump in Chagrin!
    Therein perish quickly!"


Of the widely-spread and ancient belief in the magic virtues of garlic
and red wool I have elsewhere spoken. That witches and goblins or
imps ride horses by night and then restore them in the morning to
their stalls in a wretched condition--trembling, enfeebled, and with
tangled manes--is believed all the world over, and it would probably
be found that the Chagrin also gallops them.

Another charm against this being consists of taking some of the hair
of the animal, a little salt, and the blood of a bat, which is all
mixed with meal and cooked to a bread. With this the foot of the horse
is smeared, and then the empty pipkin is put into the trunk of a high
tree while these words are uttered:--


   "Ac tu cin kathe,
    Cin ádá tçutes ávlá!"

   "Stay so long here,
    Till it shall be full!"


The blood of the bat may be derived from an Oriental belief that
the bat being the most perfect of birds, because it has breasts
and suckles its young, it is specially adapted to magical uses. In
the Tyrol he who bears the left eye of a bat may become invisible,
and in Hesse he who wears the heart of a bat bound to his arm with
red thread will always win at cards. The manes of the horses which
have been tangled and twisted by the Chagrin must not be cut off or
disentangled unless these words are spoken:--


   "Cin tu jid', cin ádá bálá jiden."

   "So long live thou, long as these hairs shall live."


It is an European belief that knots of hair made by witches must not
be disentangled. The belief that such knots are made intentionally
by some intelligence is very natural. I have often been surprised to
find how frequently knots form themselves in the cord of my eye-glass,
even when pains are taken at night to lay it down so as to be free of
them. Apropos of which I may mention that this teasing personality
of the eye-glass and cord seems to have been noted by others. I was
once travelling on the Nile in company with a Persian prince, who
became convinced that his eye-glass was very unlucky, and therefore
threw it into the river.

The Chagrin specially torments mares which have recently foaled;
therefore it is held needful, soon after the birth, to put into the
water which the mother drinks glowing hot coals, which are thrice taken
from the fire. With these are included pieces of iron, such as nails,
knives, &c., and the following words are solemnly murmured:--


   "Piyá tu te ña ac sovnibnastár!"

   "Drink, and do not be sleepy!"


Many readers may here observe that charcoal and iron form a real tonic,
or very practical strengthening dose for the enfeebled mare. But here,
as in many cases medicine makes a cure and the devil or the doctor
gets the credit. The Chagrin is supposed to attack horses only while
they are asleep. Its urine often causes swellings or sores. These
are covered by day with a patch of red cloth, which is stuck at night
into a hole in a tree, which is closed with a cork, while these words
are pronounced:--


   "Ac tu káthe
    Cin áulá táv pedá
    Cin pedá yek ruk
    Cin ruk yek mánush
    Ko mudarel tut."

   "Remain thou here
    Till the rag become an animal,
    Till the animal, a tree,
    Till the tree, a man,
    Who will destroy thee!"


Dr. Wlislocki suggests that "the idea of the tree's becoming a man,
is derived from the old gypsy belief that the first human beings
were made from the leaves of trees," and refers to what he has
elsewhere written on a tradition of the creation of the world, as
held by Transylvanian gypsies. The following is a children's song,
in which the belief may be traced:--


   "Amaro dád jál ándro bes
    Cingerel odoy caves,
    Del dáyákri andre pádá
    Yek cavoro ádá ávla."

   "Our father went into a wood,
    There he cut a boy,
    Laid it in mother's bed,
    So a boy comes."


The Greeks believed that man was made from an ash-tree, and the
Norsemen probably derived it from the same source with them. In
1862 I published in The Continental Magazine (New York) a paper on
the lore connected with the ash, in which effort was made to show
that in early times in India the Banyan was specially worshipped,
and that the descendants of men familiar with this cult had, after
migrating to the Far West, transferred the worship and traditions
of the banyan to the ash. It has been observed that the ash-tree
sometimes--like the banyan--sends its shoots down to the ground,
where they take root. The Algonkin Indians seem to have taken this
belief of man's origin from the ash from the Norsemen, as a very
large proportion of their myths correspond closely to those of the
Edda. But, in brief, if the Greeks and Norsemen were of Aryan origin,
and had ever had a language in common, they probably had common myths.

The following is the remedy for the so-called Würmer, or worms, i.e.,
external sores. Before sunrise wolf's milk (Wolfsmilch, rukeskro tçud)
is collected, mixed with salt, garlic, and water, put into a pot,
and boiled down to a brew. With a part of this the afflicted spot is
rubbed, the rest is thrown into a brook, with the words:--


   "Kirmora jánen ándre tçud
    Andrál tçud, andré sir
    Andrál sir, andré páñi,
    Panensá kiyá dádeske,
    Kiyá Niváseske
    Pçándel tumen shelehá
    Eñávárdesh teñá!"

   "Worms go in the milk,
    From the milk into the garlic,
    From the garlic into the water,
    With the water to (your) father,
    To the Nivasi,
    He shall bind you with a rope,
    Ninety-nine (yards long)."


A common cure of worms in swine among the Transylvanian tent-gypsies
is to stand ere the sun rises before a çadcerli, or nettle, and while
pouring on it the urine of the animal to be cured, repeat:--


   "Láce, láce detehárá!
    Hin mánge máy bute trásha
    Kirmora hin [báleceske],
    Te me penáv, penáv tute!
    Káles hin yon, loles, párnes,
    Deisislá hin yon mulánes!"

   "Good, good morrow!
    I have much sorrow.
    Worms are in [my swine to-day]
    And I say, to you I say,
    Black are they or white or red
    By to-morrow be they dead!"


The nettle has its own peculiar associations. According to the gypsies
it grows chiefly in places where there is a subterranean passage
to the dwellings of the Pçuvus, or Earth-fairies, therefore it is
consecrated to them and called Kásta Pçuvasengré, Pcuvus-wood. Hence
the gypsy children while gathering nettles for pigs sing:--


   "Cádcerli ná pçábuvá!
    André ker me ná jiáv,
    Kiyá Pçuvus ná jiáv,
    Tráden, tráden kirmorá!"

   "Nettle, nettle do not burn,
    In your house no one shall go,
    No one to the Pcuvus goes,
    Drive, drive away the worms!"


"The nettle," says Friedrich ("Symbolik der Natur," p. 324), "because
it causes a burning pain is among the Hindoos a demoniac symbol, for,
as they say, the great serpent poured out its poison on it. But as evil
is an antidote for evil, the nettle held in the hand is a guard against
ghosts, and it is good for beer when laid upon the barrel." "From its
employment as an aphrodisiac, and its use in flagellation to restore
sexual power, it is regarded as sacred to Nature by the followers of a
secret sect or society still existing in several countries, especially
Persia" (MS. account of certain Secret Societies). The gypsies believe
that the Earth-fairies are the foes of every kind of worm and creeping
insect with the exception of the snail, which they therefore call
the "gráy Pçuvusengré," the Pçuvus-horse. Gry-puvusengree would
in English gypsy mean the earthy-horse. English gypsies, and the
English peasantry, as well as gypsies, call snails "cattle, because
they have horns." Snails are a type of voluptuousness, because they
are hermaphrodite, and exceedingly giving to sexual indulgence, so
that as many as half a dozen may be found mutually giving and taking
pleasure. Hence in German Schnecke, a snail, is a term applied to
the pudendum muliebre. And as anything significant of fertility,
generation, and sexual enjoyment was supposed to constitute a charm
or amulet against witchcraft, i.e., all evil influences, which are
allied to sterility, chastity, and barrenness, a snail's shell forms
a powerful fetish for a true believer. The reference to white, black,
or red in the foregoing charm, or rather the one before it, refers,
says Dr. Wlislocki, to the gypsy belief that there are white, black,
and red Earth-fairies. A girl can win (illicit) love from a man by
inducing him to carry a snail shell which she has had for some time
about her person. To present a snail shell is to make a very direct
but not very delicate declaration of love to any one. I have heard
of a lady who caused an intense excitement in a village by collecting
about a hundred large snails, gilding their shells, and then turning
them loose in several gardens, where their discovery excited, as may
be supposed, great excitement among the finders.

If pigs lose their appetites a brew is made of milk, charcoal dust,
and their own dung, which is put before them with the words: "Friss
Hexe und verreck!"

"In this place I must remark that the Transylvanian tent-gypsies use
for grumus merdoe also the expression Hirte (feris)" (Wlislocki). To
cure a cough in animals one should take from the hoofs of the first
riding horse, dirt or dust, and put it into the mouth of the suffering
animal with the words:--


   "Prejiál te náñi yov ável!"

   "May he go away and never return!"


To have a horse always in good spirits and lively during the waning
moon his spine is rubbed with garlic, while these words are uttered:--


   "Miseç ándre tut,
    O beng the çal but!
    Laces ándre tut
    Acel ándre tut!"

   "(What is) evil in thee,
    May the devil eat it much!
    (What is) good in thee,
    May it remain in thee!"


But it is far more effective when the garlic is put on a rag of the
clothes of one who has been hanged, and the place rubbed with it: in
which we have a remnant of the earliest witchcraft, before Shamanism,
which had recourse to the vilest and most vulgar methods of exciting
awe and belief. This is in all probability the earliest form in which
magic, or the power of controlling invisible or supernatural influences
manifested itself, and it is very interesting to observe that it still
survives, and that the world still presents every phase of its faiths,
ab initio.

There is a very curious belief or principle attached to the use of
songs in conjuring witches, or in averting their own sorcery. It
is that the witch is obliged, willy nilly, to listen to the end
to what is in metre, an idea founded on the attraction of melody,
which is much stronger among savages and children than with civilized
adults. Nearly allied to this is the belief that if the witch sees
interlaced or bewildering and confused patterns she must follow them
out, and by means of this her thoughts are diverted or scattered. Hence
the serpentine inscriptions of the Norsemen and their intertwining
bands which were firmly believed to bring good luck or avert evil
influence. A traveller in Persia states that the patterns of the
carpets of that country are made as bewildering as possible "to avert
the evil eye." And it is with this purpose that in Italian, as in
all other witchcraft, so many spells and charms depend on interwoven
braided cords.


   "Twist ye, twine ye, even so,
    Mingle threads of joy and woe."


The basis for this belief is the fascination, or instinct, which
many persons, especially children, feel to trace out patterns, to
thread the mazes of labyrinths or to analyze and disentangle knots and
"cat's cradles." Did space permit, nor inclination fail, I could point
out some curious proofs that the old belief in the power of long and
curling hair to fascinate was derived not only from its beauty but
also because of the magic of its curves and entanglements.

The gypsies believe that the Earth-spirits are specially interested
in animals. They also teach women the secrets of medicine and
sorcery. There are indications of this in the negro magic. Miss
Mary Owen, an accomplished Folk-lorist of St. Joseph, Missouri, who
has been deeply instructed in Voodooism, informs me that a woman to
become a witch must go by night into a field and pull up a weed by
the roots. From the quantity of soil which clings to it, is inferred
the degree of magic power which the pupil will attain. I am not
astonished to learn that when this lady was initiated, the amount
of earth collected was unusually great. In such cases the Pchuvus
(or Poovus in English gypsy), indicate their good-will by bestowing
"earth," which, from meaning luck or good-fortune, has passed in
popular parlance to signifying money.








CHAPTER VI.

OF PREGNANCY AND CHARMS, OR FOLK-LORE CONNECTED WITH IT--BOARS'
TEETH AND CHARMS FOR PREVENTING THE FLOW OF BLOOD.


Like all Orientals the gypsy desires intensely to have a
family. Superstition comes in to increase the wish, for a barren woman
in Eastern Europe is generally suspected of having had intercourse with
a vampire or spirit before her marriage, and she who has done this,
willingly or unconsciously, never has children. They have recourse
to many magic medicines or means to promote conception; one of the
most harmless in Hungary is to eat grass from the grave in which a
woman with child has been buried. While doing this the woman repeats:--


   "Dui riká hin mire minc,
    Dui yará hin leskro kor,
    Avnás dui yek jelo,
    Keren ákána yek jeles."


Or else the woman drinks the water in which the husband has cast hot
coals, or, better still, has spit, saying:--


   "Káy me yákh som
    Ac tu ángár,
    Káy me brishind som,
    Ac tu pani!"

   "Where I am flame
    Be thou the coals!
    Where I am rain
    Be thou the water!"


Or at times the husband takes an egg, makes a small hole at each end,
and then blows the yolk and white into the mouth of his wife who
swallows them.

There are innumerable ways and means to ensure pregnancy, some of which
are very dangerous. Faith in the so-called "artificial propagation" is
extensively spread. "Will der Zigeuner einen Sohn erzielen, so gürtet
er sich mit dem Halfterzaume eines männlichen Pferdes und umgekehrt
mit dem einer Stute, will er eine Tochter erzeugen." ("Gebräuche
d. Trans. Zig." Dr. H. von Wlislocki. "Ill. Zeitschrift. Band,"
51. No. 16.)

If a gypsy woman in Transylvania wishes to know whether she be with
child, she must stand for nine evenings at a cross-road with an
axe or hammer, which she must wet with her own water, and then bury
there. Should it be dug up on the ninth morning after, and found rusty,
it is a sign that she is "in blessed circumstances."

To bring on the menses a gypsy woman must, while roses are in bloom,
wash herself all over with rose-water, and then pour the water over
a rose-bush. Or she takes an egg, pours its contents into a jug, and
makes water on it. If the egg swims the next morning on the surface
she is enceinte; if the yolk is separate from the white she will bear
a son, if they are mingled a daughter. In Tuscany women wishing for
children go to a priest, get a blessed apple and pronounce over it an
incantation to Santa Anna, which was probably addressed in Roman days
to Lucina, who was very probably, according to the Romagna dialect,
lu S'anna--Santa Anna herself. I have several old Roman spells from
Marcellus, which still exist word for word in Italian, but fitted to
modern usage in this manner like old windows to new houses.

Should a woman eat fish while pregnant the child will be slow in
learning to speak, but if she feed on snails it will be slow in
learning to walk. The proverbs, "Dumb as a fish," and "Slow as a
snail," appear here.

To protect a child against the evil eye it is hung with amulets,
generally with shells (die eine Aehnlichkeit mit der weiblichen
Scham haben). And these must be observed on all occasions, and
for everything, ceremonies, of which there are literally hundreds,
showing that gypsies, notwithstanding their supposed freedom from
conventionalisms, are, like all superstitious people, harassed and
vexed to a degree which would seem incredible to educated Europeans,
with observances and rites of the most ridiculous and vexatious
nature. The shells alluded to are, however, of great interest,
as they indicate the transmission of the old belief that symbols
typical of generation, pleasure, and reproductiveness, are repugnant
to witchcraft which is allied to barrenness, destruction, negation,
and every kind of pain and sterility.

Hence a necklace of shells, especially cowries or snail shells,
or the brilliant and pretty conchiglie found in such abundance near
Venice, are regarded as protecting animals or children from the evil
eye, and facilitating love, luxury, and productiveness. I have read
an article in which a learned writer rejects with indignation the
"prurient idea" that the cowrie, which gave its name porcellana to
porcelain, derived it from porcella, in sensu obsceno; porcella being
a Roman word not only for pig but for the female organ. But every
donkey-boy in Cairo could have told him that the cowrie is used in
strings on asses as on children because the shell has the likeness
which the writer to whom I refer rejects with indignation. The pig,
as is well known, is a common amulet, the origin thereof being that
it is extremely prolific. It has within a few years been very much
revived in silver as a charm for ladies, and may be found in most
shops where ornaments for watch-chains are sold. The boar's tooth,
as I have before mentioned, has been since time immemorial a charm; I
have found them attached to chatelaines and bunches of keys, especially
in Austria, from one to four or five centuries past. They are found
in prehistoric graves. The tusk is properly a male emblem; a pig is
sometimes placed on the base. These are still very commonly made and
sold. I saw one worn by the son of a travelling basket-maker, who spoke
Romany, and I purchased several in Vienna (1888), also in Copenhagen
in 1889. In Florence very large boars' tusks are set as brooches, and
may be found generally in the smaller jewellers' shops and on the Ponte
Vecchio. They are regarded as protective against malocchio--a general
term for evil influences--especially for women during pregnancy, and
as securing plenty, i.e., prosperity and increase, be it of worldly
goods, honour, or prosperity. There is in the museum at Budapest
a boar's tusk, mounted or set as an amulet, which is apparently of
Celtic origin, and which certainly belongs to the migration of races,
or a very early period. And it is in this eastern portion of Europe
that it is still most generally worn as a charm.

In connection with pregnancy and childbirth there is the profluvium,
excessive flow of blood, or menses or hemorrhages, for which there
exist many charms, not only among gypsies but all races. This includes
the stopping any bleeding--an art in which Scott's Lady of Deloraine
was an expert, and which many practised within a century.


   "Tom Potts was but a serving man,
      And yet he was a doctor good,
    He bound a handkerchief on the wound,
      And with some kind of words he staunched the blood."


What these same kind of words were among old Germans and Romans may
be learned from the following: Jacob Grimm had long been familiar
with a German magic spell of the eleventh century--ad stringendum
sanguinem, or stopping bleeding--but, as he says, "noch nicht zu
deuten vermochte," could not explain them. They were as follows:--


   "Tumbo saz in berke,
    Mit tumbemo kinde in arme,
    Tumb hiez der berc
    Tumb hiez daz kint,
    Der heiligo Tumbo
    Versegne dise wunta."

   "Tumbo (i.e., dumm or stupid) sat in the hill
    With a stupid child in arms,
    Dumb (stupid) the hill was called
    Dumb was called the child,
    The holy Tumbo (or dumb).
    Heal (bless) this wound!"


Some years after he found the following among the magic formulas of
Marcellus Burdigalensis:--


   "Carmen utile profluvio mulieri:--

       "Stupidus in monte ibat,
        Stupidus stupuit,
        Adjuro te matrix
        Ne hoc iracunda suscipias.

   "Pari ratione scriptum ligabis."


I.e.: "A song useful for a flow of blood in woman:--


   "The stupid man went into the mountain,
    The stupid man was amazed;
    I adjure thee, oh womb,
    Be not angry!"


"Which shall also be bound as a writing," i.e., according to a
previous direction that it shall be written on virgin parchment,
and bound with a linen cord about the waist of him or of her--quæ
patietur de qualibet parte corporis sanguinis fluxum--who suffers
anywhere from flow of blood.

It is possible that the Stupidus and his blessing of women has here
some remotely derived reference to the reverence amounting to worship
of idiots in the East, who are described as being surrounded in some
parts of India by matrons seeking for their touch and benediction,
and soliciting their embraces. This is effected very often in an
almost public manner; that is to say, by a crowd of women closely
surrounding the couple, i.e., the idiot or lunatic and one of their
number are joined, so that passers-by cannot see what is going on. The
children born of these casual matches are not unusually themselves
of weak mind, but are considered all the more holy. This recalls the
allusion in the charm:--


   "Stupid sat in the hill
    With a stupid child in arms."


This obscure myth of the stupid god appears to be very ancient.


   "This Tritas is called intelligent. How then does he appear
    sometimes stupid? The language itself supplies the explanation. In
    Sanskrit bâlas means both child and stolid, and the third
    brother is supposed to be stolid because, at his first appearance
    especially, he is a child. (Tritas is one of the three brothers
    or gods, i.e., the trinity)." ("Zoological Mythology," by Angelo
    de Gubernatis, 1872).


I am indebted to the as yet unpublished collection of Gypsyana made
by Prof. Anton Herrmann for the following:--

There is a superstition among our gypsies that if the shadow of a cross
on a grave falls on a woman with child she will have a miscarriage, and
this seems to be peculiarly appropriate to girls who have "anticipated
the privileges of matrimony." The following rhyme seems to describe
the hesitation of a girl who has gone to a cross to produce the result
alluded to, but who is withheld by love for her unborn infant:--


   "Cigno trussul pal handako
    Hin ada usalinako;
    The ziav me pro usalin,
    Ajt' mange lasavo na kin.

    Sar e praytin kad' chasarel,
    Save sile barval marel,
    Pal basavo te prasape,
    Mre cajori mojd kamale."

   "Cross upon a grave so small
    Here I see thy shadow fall,
    If it fall on me they say
    All my shame will pass away.

    As the autumn leaf is blown,
    By the wind to die alone,
    Yet in shame and misery,
    My baby will be dear to me!"


There is a belief allied to this of the power of the dead in graves
to work wonders, to the effect that if any one plucks a rose from a
grave, he or she will soon die. In the following song a gypsy picks
a rose from the grave of the one he loved, hoping that it will cause
his death:--


   "Cignoro hrobosa
    Hin sukares rosa
    Mange la pchagavas,
    Doi me na kamavas.

    Bes'las piranake,
    Hrobas hin joy mange,
    Pchgavas, choc zanav
    Pal lele avava
    Te me ne brinzinav.
    The me pocivinav."

   "On her little tomb there grows
    By itself a lovely rose,
    All alone the rose I break,
    And I do it for her sake.

    I sat by her I held so dear,
    Now her grave and mine are near,
    I break the rose because I know
    That to her I soon must go,
    Grief cannot my spirit stir,
    Since I know I go to her!"


M. Kounavine (contribution by Dr. A. Elysseeff, Gypsy-Lore Journal,
July, 1890), gives the following as a Russian gypsy spell against
barrenness:--


   "Laki, thou destroyest and dost make everything on earth; thou
    canst see nothing old, for death lives in thee, thou givest birth
    to all upon the earth for thou thyself art life. By thy might
    cause me ---- to bear good fruit, I who am deprived of the joy
    of motherhood, and barren as a rock."


According to Dr. Elysseeff, Laki is related to the Indian goddess
Lakshmi, although differing from her in character. Another incantation
of the same nature is as follows:--


   "Thou art the mother of every living creature and the distributor
    of good: thou doest according to thy wisdom in destroying what is
    useless or what has lived its destined time; by thy wisdom thou
    makest the earth to regenerate all that is new.... Thou dost
    not seek the death of any one, for thou art the benefactress
    of mankind."








CHAPTER VII.

THE RECOVERY OF STOLEN PROPERTY--LOVE-CHARMS--SHOES AND LOVE-POTIONS,
OR PHILTRES.


When a man has lost anything, or been robbed, he often has in his
own mind, quite unconsciously, some suspicion or clue to it. A clever
fortune-teller or gypsy who has made a life-long study of such clues,
can often elicit from the loser, hints which enable the magician to
surmise the truth. Many people place absolute confidence in their
servants, and perhaps suspect nobody. The detective or gypsy has no
such faith in man, and suspects everybody. Where positive knowledge
cannot be established there is, however, another resource. The thief
is often as superstitious as his victim. Hence he fears that some
mysterious curse may be laid on him, which he cannot escape. In
the Pacific Islands, as among negroes everywhere, a man will die if
taboo or voodoo attaches to the taking of objects which have been
consecrated by a certain formula. Therefore such formulas are commonly
employed. Among the Hungarian gypsies to recover a stolen animal,
some of its dung is taken and thrown to the East and the West with
the words:--


   "Kay tut o kam dikhel:
    Odoy ává kiyá mánge!"

   "Where the sun sees thee,
    Hence return to me!"


But when a horse has been stolen, they take what is left of his
harness, bury it in the earth and make a fire over it, saying:--


   "Kó tut cordyás
    Nasvales th' ávlás
    Leske sor ná ávlás,
    Tu ná ac kiyá leske
    Avá sástes kiyá mánge!
    Leskro sor káthe pashlyol
    Sár e tçuv avriurál!"

   "Who stole thee
    Sick may he be
    May his strength depart!
    Do not thou remain by him,
    Come (back) sound to me,
    His strength lies here
    As the smoke goes away!"


To know in which direction the stolen thing lies, they carry a sucking
babe to a stream, hold it over the water and say:--


   "Pen mánge, oh Nivaseya
    Caveskro vástehá
    Kay hin m'ro gráy,
    Ujes hin cavo,
    Ujes sár o kam
    Ujes sár páni
    Ujes sár cumut
    Ujes sár legujes?
    Pen mánge, oh Niváseyá,
    Cáveskro vastehá
    Kay hin m'ro gráy!"

   "Tell me, oh Nivaseha,
    By the child's hand!
    Where is my horse?
    Pure is the child
    Pure as the sun,
    Pure as water,
    Pure as the moon,
    Pure as the purest.
    Tell me, oh Nivaseha,
    By the child's hand!
    Where is my horse?"


In this we have an illustration of the widely spread belief that an
innocent child is a powerful agent in prophecy and sorcery. The oath
"by the hand" is still in vogue among all gypsies. "Apo miro dadeskro
vast!" ("By my father's hand!") is one of their greatest oaths in
Germany, ("Die Zigeuner," von Richard Liebich), and I have met with
an old gypsy in England who knew it.

If a man who is seeking for stolen goods finds willow twigs grown
into a knot, he ties it up and says:--


   "Me avri pçándáv coreskro báçht!"

   "I tie up the thief's luck!"


There is also a belief among the gypsies that these knots are twined
by the fairies, and that whoever undoes them undoes his own luck,
or that of the person on whom he is thinking. (Vide Rocholz,
"Alemannisches Kinderlied und Kinderspiel aus der Schweiz,"
p. 146). These willow-knots are much used in love-charms. To win
the love of a maid, a man cuts one of them, puts it into his mouth,
and says:--


   "T're báçt me çáv,
    T're baçt me piyáv,
    Dáv tute m're baçt,
    Káná tu mánge sál."

   "I eat thy luck,
    I drink thy luck;
    Give me that luck of thine,
    Then thou shalt be mine."


Then the lover, if he can, secretly hides this knot in the bed of
the wished-for bride. It is worth noting that these lines are so much
like English Gypsy as it was once spoken that there are still men who
would, in England, understand every word of it. Somewhat allied to
this is another charm. The lover takes a blade of grass in his mouth,
and turning to the East and the West, says:--


   "Kay o kám, avriável,
    Kiya mánge lele beshel!
    Kay o kám tel' ável,
    Kiya lelákri me beshav."

   "Where the sun goes up
    Shall my love be by me!
    Where the sun goes down
    There by her I'll be."


Then the blade of grass is cut up into pieces and mingled with
some food which the girl must eat, and if she swallow the least bit
of the grass, she will be gewogen und treugesinnt--moved to love,
and true-hearted. On which Dr. Wlislocki remarks on the old custom
"also known to the Hindoos," by which any one wishing to deprecate
the wrath of another, or to express complete subjection, takes a
blade of grass in his mouth. Of which Grimm writes: "This custom
may have sprung from the idea that the one conquered gave himself
up like a domestic animal to the absolute power of another. And with
this appears to be connected the ancient custom of holding out grass
as a sign of surrender. The conquered man took the blade of grass in
his mouth and then transferred it to his conqueror."

If a gypsy girl be in love she finds the foot-print of her "object,"
digs out the earth which is within its outline and buries this under
a willow-tree, saying:--


   "Upro pçuv hin but pçuvá;
    Kás kámáv, mange th' ávlá!
    Bárvol, bárvol, sálciye,
    Brigá ná hin mánge!
    Yov tover, me pori,
    Yov kokosh, me cátrá,
    Ádá, ádá me kamav!"

   "Many earths on earth there be,
    Whom I love my own shall be,
    Grow, grow willow tree!
    Sorrow none unto me!
    He the axe, I the helve,
    He the cock, I the hen,
    This, this (be as) I will!"


Another love-charm which belongs to ancient black witchcraft, and is
known far and wide, is the following: When dogs are coupling (Wenn Hund
und Hündin bei der Paarung zusammenhängen) the lover suddenly covers
them with a cloth, if possible, one which is afterwards presented to
the girl whom he seeks, while he says:--


   "Me jiuklo, yoy jiukli,
    Yoy tover, me pori,
    Me kokosh, yoy cátrá,
    Ádá, ádá me kamáv!"

   "I the dog, she the bitch,
    I the helve, she the axe,
    I the cock (and) she the hen,
    That, that I desire."


He or she who finds a red ribbon, tape, or even a piece of red stuff
of any kind, especially if it be wool, will have luck in love. It
must be picked up and carried as an amulet, and when raising it from
the ground the finder must make a wish for the love of some person,
or if he have no particular desire for any one, he may wish for luck
in love, or a sweetheart. This is, I believe, pretty generally known
in some form all over the world. A yellow ribbon or flower, especially
if it be floating on water, presages gold; a white object, silver,
or peace or reconciliation with enemies.

It is also lucky for love to find a key. In Tuscany there is a special
formula which must be spoken while picking it up. Very old keys are
valuable amulets. Those who carry them will learn secrets, penetrate
mysteries, and succeed in what they undertake.

If you can get a shoe which a girl has worn you may make sad havoc
with her heart if you carry it near your own. Also hang it up over
your bed and put into it the leaves of rue.

During November, 1889, not a few newspaper commentators busied
themselves with conjectures as to why a Scotch constable buried the
boots of a murdered man. That it was done through some superstitious
belief is conceded; but what the fashion of the superstition is
seems unknown. It originated, beyond question, in the old Norse
custom of always burying the dead in their shoes or with them. For
they believed that the deceased would have, when he arrived in the
other world, to traverse broad and burning plains before he could
reach his destination, be it Valhalla or the dreary home of Hel;
and to protect his feet from the fire his friends bound on them the
"hell-shoon." Other cares were also taken: and in the saga of Olof
Tryggvasen we are told that one monarch was thoughtfully provided
with a cow; while the Vikings were buried in their ships, so that
they could keep on pirating "for ever and ever."

The superstition of the burial of the boots probably survives in
England. It is about seventeen years since the writer heard from an
old gypsy that when another gypsy was "pûvado," or "earthed," a very
good pair of boots was placed by him in the grave. The reason was not
given; perhaps it was not known. These customs often survive after
the cause is forgotten, simply from some feeling that good or bad
luck attends their observance or the neglect of it. Many years since
a writer in an article on shoes in The English Magazine stated that,
"according to an Aryan tradition, the greater part of the way from
the land of the living to that of death lay through morasses and vast
moors overgrown with furzes and thorns. That the dead might not pass
over them bare-foot, a pair of shoes was laid with them in the grave."

The shoe was of old in many countries a symbol of life, liberty, or
entire personal control. In Ruth we are told that "it was the custom
in Israel concerning changing, that a man plucked off his shoe and
delivered it to his neighbour." So the bride, who was originally
always a slave, transferred herself by the symbol of the shoe. When
the Emperor Waldimir made proposals of marriage to the daughter of
Ragnald, she replied scornfully that she would not take off her shoes
to the son of a slave. Gregory of Tours, in speaking of wedding, says:
"The bridegroom, having given a ring to the bride, presents her with
a shoe."

As regards the Scandinavian hel-shoe, or hell-shoon, Kelley, in his
"Indo-European Folk-lore," tells us that a funeral is still called
a dead shoe in the Henneberg district; and the writer already cited
adds that in a MS. of the Cotton Library, containing an account of
Cleveland in Yorkshire, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, there is a
passage which illustrates this curious custom. It was quoted by Sir
Walter Scott in the notes to "Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border,"
and runs thus:--


   "When any dieth certaine women sing a song to the dead bodie,
    reciting the journey that the partye deceased must goe; and they
    are of beliefe that once in their lives it is goode to give a
    pair of new shoes to a poor man; forasmuch as before this life
    they are to pass bare-foote through a great lande, full of thornes
    and furzen--excepte by the meryte of the almes aforesaid they have
    redeemed the forfeyte--for at the edge of the launde an oulde man
    shall meet them with the same shoes that were given by the partie
    when he was lyving, and after he hath shodde them dismisseth them
    to go through thick and thin without scratch or scalle.


This must be a very agreeable reflection to all gentlemen who have
bestowed their old boots on waiters, or ladies who have in like
fashion gifted their maids. It is true, the legend specifies new
shoes; but surely a pair of thirty-shilling boots only half worn count
for as much as a new pair of half a sovereign chaussures. However,
if one is to go "through thick and thin without scratch or scalle,"
it may be just as well to be on the safe side, and give a good new
extra stout pair to the gardener for Christmas. For truly these
superstitions are strange things, and no one knows what may be in them.

There are one or two quaint shoe stories of the olden time which
may be of value to the collector. It befell once in the beginnings
of Bohemia, that, according to Schafarik ("Slawische Alterthümer,"
vol. ii. p. 422), Lïbussa, queen of that land, found herself compelled
by her council to wed. And the wise men, being consulted, declared that
he who was to marry the queen would be found by her favourite horse,
who would lead the way till he found a man eating from an iron table,
and kneel to him. So the horse went on, and unto a field where a man
sat eating a peasant's dinner from a ploughshare. This was the farmer
Prschemischl. So they covered him with the royal robes and led him to
the queen expectant. But ere going he took his shoes of willow-wood
and placed them in his bosom and kept them to remind him ever after
of his low origin. It will, of course, at once strike the reader,
as it has the learned, that this is a story which would naturally
originate in any country where there are iron ploughshares, horses,
queens, and wooden shoes: and, as Schafarik shrewdly suggests, that
it was all "a put-up job;" since, of course, Prschemischl was already
a lover of the queen, the horse was trained to find him and to kneel
before him, and, finally, that the ploughshare and wooden shoes were
the prepared properties of the little drama. The only little flaw in
this evidence is the name Prschemischl, which, it must be admitted,
is extremely difficult to get over.

The Seven League Boots and the shoes of Peter Schlemihl, which take
one over the world at will, have a variation in a pair recorded
in another tale. There was a beautiful and extremely proud damsel,
who refused a young man with every conceivable aggravation of the
offence, informing him that when she ran after him, and not before
that, he might hope to marry her; and at the same time meeting a poor
old gypsy woman who begged her for a pair of old shoes. To which the
proud Princess replied:--


   "Shoes here, shoes there;
    Give me a couple, I'll give thee a pair."


To which the old gypsy, who was a witch, grimly muttered, "I'll give
thee a pair which----" The rest of the expression was really too
unamiable to repeat. Well, the youth and the witch met, and, going to
the lady's shoemaker, "made him make" a superbly elegant pair of shoes,
which were sent to the damsel as a gift. Such a gift! No sooner were
they put on than off they started, carrying the Princess, malgré elle,
over hill and dale. By and by she saw that a man--the man, of course,
whom she had refused--was in advance of her. As in the song of the
Cork Leg, "the shoes never stopped, but kept on the pace." And the
young man led her to a lonely castle and reasoned with her. And as
she had promised to marry should she ever run after him, and as she
had pursued him a whole day, she kept her word. The shoes she sent
to the witch filled with gold; and they were wedded, and all went as
merry as a thousand grigs in a duck-pond.

The shoe, as has been shown by a Danish writer in a book chiefly
devoted to the subject, is a type of life, especially as shown in
productiveness and fertility. Hence old shoes and grain are thrown
after a bride, as people say, for luck; but the Jews do it crying,
"Peru urphu"--"Increase and multiply." For this, and much more, the
reader may consult that wonderful treasury of Folk-lore, "Die Symbolik
und Mythologie der Natur," J. B. Friedrich, Würzburg, 1859. To which
we would add our mite by remarking as a curious confirmation of this
theory, that--


    There was an old woman who lived in a shoe,
    Who had so many children she didn't know what to do.


This passes now for a mere nursery-rhyme; but doubtless there are
those who will trace it back to the early morning of mythology,
and prove that it was once a Himaritic hymn, sung to some Melitta
who has long passed away down the back entry of time.

For several additional Hungarian gypsy love-charms and spells,
collected by Dr. Wlislocki, published in Ethnographia, and subsequently
in The Gipsy-Lore Journal for June, 1890, I am greatly indebted to
the kindness of Mr. D. MacRitchie:--


   "The gypsy girls of Transylvania believe that spells to 'know
    your future husband' can be best carried out on the eves of
    certain days, such as New Year, Easter, and Saint George. 'On
    New Year's Eve they throw shoes or boots on a willow tree, but
    are only allowed to throw them nine times.' Compare this with the
    throwing of the old shoe after the bride in many countries. 'If
    the shoe catches in the branches the girl who threw it will be
    married within a year.'

   "On the same eve they go to a tree and shake it by turns,
    singing:--

      "'Per de, per de prájtina,
        Varekaj hin, hász kamav?
        Basá, párro dzsiuklo,
        Pirano dzsal mai szigo.'

      "'Scattered leaves around I see,
        Where can my true lover be?
        Ah, the white dog barks at last!
        And my love comes running fast!'

   "If during the singing the bark of a dog should be heard, the
    damsel will be 'wedded and bedded ere New Year comes again. This
    is virtually the same with a charm practised in Tuscany, which from
    other ancient witness I believe to be of Etruscan origin. Allied to
    this is the following: On the night of Saint George's Day (query,
    Saint George's Eve?) gypsy girls blindfold a white dog, then,
    letting it loose, place themselves quietly in several places. She
    to whom the dog runs first will be the first married. Blindman's
    buff was anciently an amorous, semi-magical, or witches' game,
    only that in place of the dog a man was blindfolded.

  "'Or the girl pulls a hair from her head, fastens a ring to it,
    and dangles it in a jug. The ring vibrates or swings, and so
    often as it touches the side of the jug so many years will it
    be before she marries.' This is an ancient spell of Eastern
    origin. As performed according to old works the thread must be
    wound around the ring-finger and touch the pulse. On the edge of a
    bowl the letters of the alphabet, or numerals, are marked, and the
    ring swinging against these spells words or denotes numbers. The
    touching of the latter indicates the number of lovers a girl is
    to have.

   "Early on Whitsunday morning the girls go out, and if they see
    clouds in the East they throw twigs in that direction, saying:--

      "'Predzsia, csirik leja,
        Te ná tráda m're píranes.'

      "'Fly my bird--fly, I say,
        Do not chase my love away.'

   "For they think that if on Whitsun-morn there are many clouds in
    the East few girls will be married during the coming year. This
    peculiar, seemingly incomprehensible, custom of the gypsies
    originated in an old belief, the germ of which we find in
    the Hindoo myth, according to which the spring morning which
    spreads brightness and blessings descends from the blue bird
    of heaven, who, on the other hand, also represents night or
    winter. Special preparations are made so that the predictions shall
    be fulfilled. On the days mentioned the girls are neither allowed
    to wash themselves, nor to kiss any one, nor go to church. At
    Easter, or on the Eve of Saint George, the girl must eat fish,
    in order to see the future in her dreams.

   "On Easter morning the girls boil water, in the bubbles of which
    they try to make out the names of their future husbands.

   "To find out whether the future husband is young or old the girl
    must take nine seeds of the thorn-apple, ploughed-up earth of
    nine different places, and water from as many more. With these
    she kneads a cake, which is laid on a cross-road on Easter or
    Saint George's morning. If a woman steps first on the cake her
    husband will be a widower or an old man, but if a man the husband
    will be single or young.

   "To see the form of a future husband a girl must go on the night
    of Saint George to a cross-road. Her hair is combed backwards,
    and, pricking the little finger of the left hand, she must let
    three drops of blood fall on the ground while saying:--

      "'Mro rat dav piraneszke,
        Kász dikhav, avava adaleske.'

      "'I give my blood to my loved one,
        Whom I shall see shall be mine own!'

   "Then the form of her future husband will rise slowly out of the
    blood and fade as slowly away. She must then gather up the dust,
    or mud-blood, and throw it into a river, otherwise the Nivashi,
    or Water-spirits, will lick up the blood, and the girl be drowned
    within the year. It is said that about twenty years ago the
    beautiful Roszi (Rosa), the daughter of Peter Danku, the waywode,
    or chief of the Kukuja tribe, was drowned during the time of
    her betrothal because when she performed this ceremony she had
    neglected to gather up the sprinkled blood.

   "If a girl wishes to see the form of her future husband, and
    also to know what luck awaits her love, she goes on any of the
    fore-named nights to a cross-road, and sits down on the ground,
    putting before her a fried fish and a glass of brandy. Then the
    form of her future husband will appear and stand before her for
    a time, silent and immovable. Should he then take the fish the
    marriage will be happy, but if he begin with the brandy it will
    be truly wretched. But if he takes neither, one of the two will
    die during the year.

   "That the laying of cards, the interpretation of dreams, the
    reading of the future in the hand, and similar divinations are
    constantly practised is quite natural, but it would lead us too
    far to enlarge on all these practices. But there are charms to
    win or cause love which are more interesting. Among these are
    the love-potions or philtres, for preparing which gypsies have
    always been famed.

   "The simplest and least hurtful beverage which they give unknown to
    persons to secure love is made as follows:--On any of the nights
    mentioned they collect in the meadows gander-goose (Romání, vast
    bengeszkero--devil's hand; in Latin, Orchis maculata; German,
    Knabenkraut), the yellow roots of which they dry and crush and
    mix with their menses, and this they introduce to the food of
    the person whose love they wish to secure."


Of the same character is a potion which they prepare as follows:
On the day of Saint John they catch a green frog and put it in a
closed earthen receptacle full of small holes, and this they place
in an ant-hill. The ants eat the frog and leave the skeleton. This is
ground to powder, mixed with the blood of a bat and dried bath-flies
and shaped into small buns, which are, as the chance occurs, put
secretly into the food of the person to be charmed.

There is yet another charm connected with this which I leave in
the original Latin in which it is modestly given by Dr. Wlislocki:
"Qualibet supradictarum noctium occiduntur duo canes nigri, mas et
femina, quorum genitalia exstirpata ad condensationem coquntur. Hujus
materiæ particula consumpta quemvis invincibili amore facit exardescare
in eam eamve, qui hoc medio prodigioso usus est."

It may be remarked that these abominable charms are also not only
known to the Tuscan witches of the present day, but are found in Voodoo
sorcery, and are indeed all over the world. To use revolting means in
black sorcery may be, or perhaps certainly is, spontaneous-sporadic,
but when we find the peculiar details of the processes identical,
we are so much nearer to transmission or history that the burden of
disproving must fall on the doubter.


   "To the less revolting philtres belongs one in which the girl
    puts the ashes of a burnt piece of her dress which had been wet
    with perspiration and has, perhaps, hair adhering to it, into a
    man's food or drink (also Tuscan).

   "To bury the foot of a badger (also Voodoo), or the eye of a crow,
    under one's sleeping-place is believed to excite or awaken love.

   "According to gypsy belief one can spread love by transplanting
    blood, perspiration, or hair into the body of a person.

   "By burning the hair, blood, or saliva of any one, his or her
    love can be extinguished.

   "The following is a charm used to punish a faithless lover. The
    deceived maid lights a candle at midnight and pricks it several
    times with a needle, saying:--

      "'Pchagerav momely
        Pchagera tre vodyi!'

      "'Thrice the candle's broke by me
        Thrice thy heart shall broken be!'

   "If the faithless lover marries another, the girl mixes the broken
    shell of a crab in his food or drink, or hides one of her hairs
    in a bird's nest. This will make the marriage unhappy, and the
    husband will continually pine for his neglected sweetheart."


This last charm is allied to another current among the Slavonians,
and elsewhere mentioned, by which it is believed that if a bird gets
any of a man's hair and works it into a nest he will suffer terribly
till it is completely decayed.








CHAPTER VIII.

ROUMANIAN AND TRANSYLVANIAN SORCERIES AND SUPERSTITIONS, CONNECTED
WITH THOSE OF THE GYPSIES.


In her very interesting account of Roumanian superstitions,
Mrs. E. Gerard ("The Land Beyond the Forest"), finds three distinct
sources for them: firstly, the indigenous, which seems to have been
formed by or adapted to the wild and picturesque scenery and character
of the country; secondly, those derived from the old German customs
and beliefs brought by the so-called Saxon, in reality Lower Rhenish
colonists; and thirdly, the influence of the gypsies, "themselves a
race of fortune-tellers and witches." All these kinds of superstition
have twined and intermingled, acted and reacted upon one another so
that in many cases it becomes a difficult matter to determine the
exact parentage of some particular belief or custom.

It may be often difficult to ascertain in what particular country or
among what people a superstition was last found, but there is very
little trouble when we compare the great body of all such beliefs
of all races and ages and thereby find the parent sources. It is
not many years since philologists, having taken up some favourite
language--for instance, Irish--discovering many words in many
tongues almost identical with others in "Earse," boldly claimed
that this tongue was the original of all the others. Now we find the
roots of them all in the Aryan. So when we examine Folk-lore, it is
doubtless of great importance that we should learn where a tradition
last lived; but we must not stop there--we must keep on inquiring
till we reach the beginning. As a rule, with little exception, when
we find anywhere the grosser forms of fetish and black witchcraft,
we may conclude that we have remains of the world's oldest faith,
or first beginning of supernaturalism in suffering and terror, a fear
of mysterious evil influences. For with all due respect to the fact
that such superstitions might have sprung up sporadically wherever
similar causes existed to create them, it is, in the first place, a
very rare chance that they should assume exactly like forms. Secondly,
we must consider that as there are even now millions of people who
receive with ready faith and carefully nurse these primæval beliefs,
so there has been from the beginning of time abundant opportunity
for their transmission and growth. Thirdly, nothing is so quickly
transmitted as Folk-lore, which in one sense includes myths and
religion. If jade was in the prehistoric stone age carried from Iona
or Tartary all over Europe, it is even more probable that myths went
with it quite as far and fast.

It is not by loose, fanciful, and careless guess-work as to how the
resemblance of Greek or Norse legends to those of the Red Indians is
due to similar conditions of climate and life, that we shall arrive
at facts; neither will the truth be ascertained by assuming that there
was a certain beginning of them all in a certain country, or that they
were all developed out of one mythology, be it solar or Shemitic,
Hindoo or Hebrew. What we want is impartial examination--comparison
and analysis. On this basis we find that all the Folk-lore or magic
of Europe, and especially of its Eastern portion, has a great deal
which is derived from black witchcraft, or from the succeeding
Shamanism. When we find that a superstition is based on fertility,
the "mystery of generation," or "Phallic worship"--as, for instance,
wearing boars' teeth or a little pig for a charm--we may conclude
that it is very ancient, but still not older than the time when
wise men had begun to reflect on the mysteries of birth and death
and weave them into myths. The exorcism of diseases as devils, and
the belief that they, in common with other evils, may be drummed, or
smoked, or incanted away into animals, trees, and streams, belongs
in most cases to Shamanism. In all probability the oldest sorcery
of all was entirely concerned with driving out devils and injuring
enemies--just as most of the play of small boys runs to fighting or
the semblance of it, or as the mutual relations of most animals in
the lower stages consist of devouring one another. This was the very
beginning of the beginnings, and it would be really marvellous that so
much of it has survived were it not that to the one who is not quite
dazzled or blinded by modern enlightenment there is still existent
a great outer circle of human darkness, and that this darkness may
be found in thousands of intermittent varying shadows or marvellous
chiaroscuro, even in the brightest sun-pictures of modern life. As I
write I have before me a copy of the Philadelphia Press, of April 14,
1889, in which a J. C. Batford, M.D., advertises that if any one will
send him two two-cent postage stamps--i.e., twopence--"with a lock of
your hair, name, age, and sex," he will send a clairvoyant diagnosis of
your disease. This divining by the lock of hair is extremely ancient,
and had its origin in the belief that he who could obtain one from an
enemy could reach his soul and kill him. From communicating a disease
by means of such a lock, and ascertaining what was the matter with
a man, in the same manner, was a very obvious step forward.

Of all people living in Europe the peasantry of Italy and Sicily
and the gypsies seem to have retained most of this Shamanism and
witchcraft, and as the latter have been for centuries its chief
priests, travelling here and there disseminating it, we may conclude
that even where they did not originate it they have been active in
keeping the old faith alive. In Roumania, where the gypsy is called
in to conjure on all occasions, "people believe themselves to be
surrounded by whole legions of devils, witches, and goblins." There
is scarcely a day or hour in which these bad spirits have not power,
"and a whole complicated system, about as laborious as the mastering
an unknown language, is required in order to teach an unfortunate
peasant to steer clear of the dangers by which he supposes himself
to be beset."

On Wednesday and Friday no one should use needle or scissors, bake
bread, or sow flax. No bargain should ever be concluded on a Friday,
and Venus, here called Paraschiva, to whom this day is sacred,
punishes all infractions of the law. There was among the Wends a
flax-goddess, Pscipolnitza, and the shears as emblematic of death are
naturally antipathetic to Venus, the source of life. Whether Mars
has anything in common with Mors I know not, but in Roumania he is
decidedly an evil spirit of death, whence Marti, or Tuesday, is one,
when spinning is positively prohibited (here we have Venus again),
and washing the hands and combing the hair are not unattended with
danger. Whence it appears that the devil agrees with not a few saints
in detesting neatness of the person. And as it is unlucky to wash
anything on Saturday, or to spin on Thursday, or to work in the fields
on Thursday between Easter and Pentecost, it will be seen that Laziness
and Dirt have between them a fine field in Roumania. Add to this that,
as in Russia, more than half the days in the year are Saints' days,
or fast days or festivals on which it is "unlucky" to work at all,
and we find that industry cannot be said to be much encouraged by Faith
in any of its forms. This belief in holy days which bring ill-luck to
those who work on them, which is still flourishing in every country
in the world, goes back to time whereof the memory of man hath naught
to the contrary. A distinct difference is here to be observed however
between naturally resting from work on certain days, which is of course
an inherent instinct in all mankind, and the declaring such rest to be
obligatory, and its infraction punishable by death, disaster, and bad
luck, and still more the increasing such Sabbaths to such an extent
as to interfere with industry, or the turning them into fast days
or Saints' days with "observances." Here the old Shamanism comes in,
if not the evil witchcraft itself which exacted penance and fasting,
and ceremonies to exorcise the devils. The first belief was that evil
spirits inflicted pain on man, and that man, by efforts which cost
him suffering, could repel or retaliate on them. This was simple
action and reaction, and the repulsion was effected with starving,
enduring smoke, or using repulsive and filthy objects. Out of this
in due time came penance of all kinds.

The Oriental or Greek Church is found at every turn, even more
than the Catholic, interchanged, twined, and confused with ancient
sorcery. Theodore, like Saint Simeon and Anthony in Tuscany, is
very much more of a goblin than a holy man. His weakness is young
women, and sometimes in the shape of a beautiful youth, at others
of a frightful monster, he carries off those who are found working
on his day--that is the 23rd of January. Theodore, according to the
Solar mythologists personifies the sun. (De Gubernatis, "Zoological
Mythology," vol. ii. p. 296). In any case the saint who seizes girls
is the Hindoo Krishna or his prototype, and therefore may have come
through the gypsies. The overworked solar myth derives some support
from the fact that among the Serbs on Theodore's day the Sintotere--or
centaur, as the name declares--who is half horse and half man, rides
over the people who fall in his power. The Centaurs were connected
with the "rape of maidens," as shown in the legend of the Lapithæ,
and it is very probable that Theodore himself is, in the language
of the Western Americans, "half a horse," which they regard as the
greatest compliment which can be paid to a man. [15]

"Wonderful potions and salves," says Mrs. Gerard, "composed of the
fat of bears, dogs, snakes, and snails, with the oil of rain-worms,
spiders, and midges, rubbed into a paste, are concocted by these
Bohemians (i.e., gypsies). Saxon and Roumanian mothers are often
in the habit of giving a child to be nursed for nine days to some
Tzigane women supposed to have power to undo the spell."

These revolting ingredients are not the result of modern invention, but
relics of the primitive witchcraft or Ur-religion, which was founded
on pain, terror, and the repulsive. Among other Roumanian-Romany
traditions are the following:--

Swallows here as elsewhere are luck-bringing birds, and termed
Galiniele lui Dieu--fowls of the Lord. So in England we hear that:--


   "The robin and the wren
    Are God Almighty's cock and hen."


There is always a treasure to be found where the first swallow is
seen. Among the Romans when it was observed one ran to the nearest
fountain and washed his eyes, and then during the whole year to come,
dolorem omnem oculorum tuorum hirundines auferant--the swallows will
carry away all your complaints of the eyes.

The skull of a horse over the gate of a courtyard, or the bones
of fallen animals buried under the doorstep are preservatives
against ghosts. In Roman architecture the skulls of oxen, rams,
and horses continually occur as a decoration, and they are used
as charms to-day in Tuscany. Black fowls are believed to be in the
service of witches. The skull of a ram placed at the boundary of a
parish in Roumania keeps off disease from cattle; it was evidently
a fetish in all ages. In Slavonian, Esthonian, and Italian tales
black poultry occur as diabolical--to appease the devil a black cock
must be sacrificed. But in Roumania the (black) Brahmaputra fowl is
believed, curiously enough, to be the offspring of the devil and a
Jewish girl--truly an insignificant result of such clever parentage.

A cow that has wandered away will be safe from witches if the owner
sticks a pair of scissors or shears in the centre crossbeam of
the dwelling-room. The Folk-lore of shears is extensive; Friedrich
derives it from the cutting of the threads of life by the Fates. Thus
Juno appears on a Roman coin (Eckhel, "Numis. Vet." viii. p. 358)
as holding the shears of death. The swallow is said in a Swedish
fairy tale to have been the handmaid of the Virgin Mary, and to have
stolen her scissors, for which reason she was turned into a bird--the
swallow's tail being supposed to resemble that article. Gypsies in
England use the shears in incantations.

A whirlwind denotes that the devil is dancing with a witch, and he
who approaches too near it may be carried off bodily to hell (as has
indeed happened to many a wicked Pike in a cyclone or blizzard in
Western America), though he may escape by losing his cap.

It is very dangerous to point at a rainbow or an approaching
thunderstorm. Probably the devil who here guides the whirlwind or
directs the storm regards the act as impolite. He punishes those who
thus indicate the rainbow by a gnawing disease. Lightning is averted
by sticking a knife in a loaf of bread and spinning the two on the
floor of the loft of the house while the storm lasts. The knife appears
not only in many gypsy spells, but in the Etruscan-Florentine magic.

The legends of Domdaniel and the College of Sorcery in Salamanca appear
in the gypsy Roumanian Scholomance, or school which exists somewhere
far away deep in the heart of the mountains, "where the secrets of
nature, the language of animals, and all magic spells are taught by the
devil in person." Only ten scholars are admitted at a time, and when
the course of learning has expired nine are dismissed to their homes,
but the tenth is detained by the professor in payment. Henceforth,
mounted on an ismeju, or dragon, he becomes the devil's aide-de-camp,
and assists him in preparing thunderbolts and managing storms and
tempests. "A small lake, immeasurably deep, high up in the mountains,
south of Hermanstadt, is supposed to be the caldron in which the
dragon lies sleeping and where the thunder is brewed."

"Whoever turns three somersaults the first time he hears thunder
will be free from pains in the back during the twelvemonth." Of this
prescription--which reads as if it had originated with Timothy, in
"Japhet in Search of a Father," when he practised as a mountebank--it
may be said that it is most unlikely that any person who is capable
of putting it in practice should suffer with such pains.

To be free from headache rub the forehead with a piece of iron or
stone. This may be a presage of the electric cure or of that by
"metallic tractors."

It is unfortunate in all Catholic countries to meet with a priest
or nun, especially when he or she is the first person encountered
in the morning. In Roumania this is limited to the Greek popa. But
to be first met by a gypsy on going forth is a very fortunate omen
indeed. According to a widely-spread and ancient belief it is also
very lucky to meet with any woman of easy virtue--the easier the
better. This is doubtless derived from the ancient worship of Venus,
and the belief that any thing or person connected with celibacy
and chastity, such as a nun, is unlucky. It would appear from this
that the Roumanians, or their gypsy oracles, have formed an opinion
that their own popas are strictly abstinent as regards love, while
Protestant priests marry and are accordingly productive. Why the
Catholic clergy are included with the latter is not at all clear. It
is lucky also to meet a gypsy at any time, and doubtless this belief
has been well encouraged by the Romany.


   "It's kushti bak to wellán a Rom,
    When tute's a pirryin pré the drom."

   "When you are going along the street
    It's lucky a gypsy man to meet."


Likewise, it is lucky to meet with a woman carrying a jug full of
water, &c., but unlucky if it be empty. So in the New Testament the
virgins whose lamps were full of oil received great honour. The lamp
was an ancient symbol of life; hence it is very often found covered
with aphrodisiac symbols or made in Phallic forms. It is barely
possible that common old popular simile of "Not by a jug-full"--meaning
"not by a great deal"--is derived from this association of a full
vessel with abundance.

It is a Roumanian gypsy custom to do homage to the Wodna zena, or
"Water-woman" (Hungarian gypsy, Nivashi), by spilling a few drops of
water on the ground after filling a jug, and it is regarded as an
insult to offer drink without observing this ceremony. A Roumanian
will never draw water against the current (also as in the Hungarian
gypsy charms), as it would provoke the water-spirit. If water is
drawn in the night-time, whoever does so must blow three times over
the brimming jug, and pour a few drops on the coals.

The mythology of the Roumanians agrees with that of the gypsies. It
is sylvan, and Indian. In deep pools of water lurks the dreadful
balaur or Wodna muz--i.e., the Waterman (Muz is both gypsy and
Slavonian)--who lies in wait for victims. In every forest lives the
mama padura, or weshni dye--"the forest mother"--who is believed to
be benevolent to human beings, especially towards children who have
lost their way in the wood. But the Panusch is an amorous spirit who,
like the wanton satyrs of old, haunts the silent woodland shades,
and lies in wait for helpless maids. "Surely," observes Mrs. Gerard,
"this is a corruption of 'great Pan,' who is not dead after all,
but merely banished to the land beyond the forest." What a find this
would have been for Heine when writing "The Gods in Exile"!

"In deep forests and lonely mountain gorges there wanders about a
wild huntsman of superhuman size." He appears to be of a mysterious
nature, and is very seldom seen. Once he met a peasant who had shot
ninety-nine bears, and warned him never to attempt to kill another. But
the peasant disregarded his advice, and, missing his aim, was torn
in pieces by the bear.

Very singular is the story that this Lord of the Forest once taught a
hunter--that if he loaded his gun on New Year's Night with a live adder
he would never miss a shot during the ensuing year. It is not probable
that he was told to put a live and "wiggling" snake into his gun. The
story of itself suggests the firing out the ramrod for luck. It has
been observed by C. Lloyd Morgan that if a drop of the oil of a foul
tobacco pipe be placed in the mouth of a snake the muscles instantly
become set in knotted lumps and the creature becomes rigid. If much is
given the snake dies, but if only a small amount is employed it may be
restored. This, as Mr. Oakley has suggested, may explain the stories
of Indian snake-charmers being able to turn a snake into a stick. It is
performed by spitting into the snake's mouth and then placing the hand
on its head till it becomes stiffened. "The effect may be produced by
opium or some other narcotic." And it may also occur to the reader that
the jugglers who performed before Pharaoh were not unacquainted with
this mystery. It is probable that the hunter in the gypsy Roumanian
story first gave his adder tobacco before firing it off.

The Om ren, or wild man, is a malevolent forest spectre, the terror
of hunters and shepherds. He is usually seen in winter, and when he
finds an intruder on his haunts, he tears up pine trees by the roots
with which he slays the victim, or throws him over a precipice, or
overwhelms him with rocks. In every detail he corresponds to a being
greatly feared by the Algonkin Indians of America.

The oameni micuti, or "small men," are grey-bearded dwarfs, dressed
like miners. They are the kobolds or Bergmännchen of Germany. They
seldom harm a miner, and when one has perished in the mine they make
it known to his family by three knocks on his door. They may be heard
quarrelling among themselves and hitting at one another with their
axes, or blowing their horns as a signal of battle. These "horns of
Elf-land blowing" connect them with the Korriagan of Brittany, who are
fairies who always carry and play on the same instrument. Prætorius
devotes a long chapter to all the learning extant on the subject of
these Bergmännrigen, or Subterraneans.

The mountain monk is the very counterpart of Friar Rush in English
fairy-lore, and is also of Indian origin. He delights in kicking over
water-pails, putting out lamps, and committing mischief, merry, mad, or
sad. Sometimes he has been known to strangle workmen whom he dislikes,
though, on the other hand, he often helps distressed miners by filling
their empty lamps or guiding those who have lost their way. But he
always bids them keep it a secret, and if they tell they suffer for it.

Gana is queen of the witches, and corresponds to the Diana of the
Italians. Gana is probably only a variation of the word Diana. Among
the Wallachians this goddess is in fact known as Dina and Sina. She,
like the wilde Jäger, rushes in headlong hunt over the heavens or
through the skies followed by a throng of witches and fairies. "People
show the places where she has passed, and where the grass and
leaves are dry" (Friedrich). She is a powerful enchantress, and is
strongest in her sorcery about Easter-tide. To guard against her the
Wallachians at this time carry a piece of lime-tree or linden wood. She
is a beautiful but terrible enchantress, who presides over the evil
spirits who meet on May eve. She was the ruler of all Transylvania
(a hunting country) before Christianity prevailed there. Her beauty
bewitched many, but whoever let himself be lured into drinking mead
from her urus (or wild ox) drinking-horn perished. She is like the
Norse Freya, a cat goddess, and seems to be allied to the Chesme,
or cat, or fountain-spirit of the Turks. According to ancient Indian
mythology the moon is a cat who chases the mice (stars) of night,
and in the fifth book of Ovid's "Metamorphoses," when the gods fled
from the giants Diana took the form of a cat:--


   "Fele soror Phoebi, nivea Saturni a vacca
    Pisce Venus latuit."

                                    (V. 325, 332.)


"According to the Hellenic cosmogony the sun and moon created
the animals--the sun creating the lion and the moon the cat" (De
Gubernatis, "Zoological Mythology," ii. 58). Gertrude, the chief
sorceress or queen of the witches in old German lore, appears when dead
as surrounded by mice; she is, in fact, a cat. The Turkish Chesme,
or fountain-cat, inveigles youths to death like the Gana, Diana,
or Lorelei, who does the same, and is also a water-sprite.

The Dschuma is a fierce virgin, or sometimes an old witch, who is
incarnate disease, such as the cholera. She is supposed to suffer from
cold and nakedness, and may be heard at night when disease is raging,
wailing for want. Then the maidens make garments and hang them out;
but it is a most effective charm when seven old women spin, weave,
and sew for her a scarlet shirt all in one night without once speaking.

A curious book might be written on the efficacy of nakedness in
witch-spells. In some places in Roumania there is a spirit always naked
(at least appearing such), who requires a new suit of clothes every
year. These are given by the inhabitants of the district haunted
by such an elf, who on New Year's Night lay them out in some place
supposed to be frequented by him or her.

In 1866, in a Wallachian village in the district of Bihar, to avert
the cholera, six youths and maidens, all quite naked, traced with
a ploughshare a furrow round their village to form a charmed circle
over which the disease could not pass.

When the land is suffering from long droughts the Roumanians ascribe
it to the gypsies, who by occult means make dry weather in order to
favour their own trade of brickmaking. When the necessary rain cannot
be obtained by beating the guilty Tziganes, the peasants resort to
the Papaluga, or Rain-maiden. For this they strip a young gypsy girl
stark-naked, and then cover her up in flowers and leaves, leaving only
the head visible. Thus adorned the Papaluga, or Miss Jack-in-the-Green,
is conducted with music round the village, every person pouring water
on her as she passes. When a gypsy girl cannot be had, or the Tziganes
are supposed to be innocent, a Roumanian maiden may be taken. This
custom is very widely spread.

Forty years ago there was a strange mania in the northern cities of
the United States for "fast" girls of the most reckless kind to go out
naked very late by night into the street to endeavour to run around
a public square or block of houses and regain their homes without
being caught by the police. I suspect that superstition suggested
this strange risk. It is an old witch-charm that if a girl can,
when the moon is full, go forth and run around a certain enclosure,
group of trees, or dwelling, without being seen, she will marry the
man whom she loves. There are also many magical ceremonies which,
to ensure success, must be performed in full moonlight and when quite
naked. "Among the Saxons in Transylvania when there is a very severe
drought it is customary in some places for several girls, led by an
old woman, and all of them absolutely naked, to go at midnight to the
courtyard of some peasant and steal his harrow. With this they walk
across fields to the nearest stream, where the harrow is put afloat
with a burning light on each corner" (Mrs. Gerard, "Land Beyond,"
&c.). This is evidently the old Hindoo floating of lamps by maidens
on the Ganges, and in all probability of gypsy importation.

She who will pronounce a certain spell, strip herself quite naked,
and can steal into the room where a man is lying sound asleep and
can clip from his head a lock of hair and escape without awakening
him or meeting any one will obtain absolute mastery over him, or at
least over his affections. The hair must be worn in a bag or ring on
the person. But woe unto her who is caught, since in that case the
enchantment "all goes the other way." Once a beautiful but very poor
Hungarian maid gave all she had to a young gypsy girl for a charm to
win the love of a certain lord, and was taught this, which proved to
be a perfect success. Having clipped the lock of hair she wove it in a
ring and wedded him. After a time she died, and the gypsy being called
in to dress the corpse found and kept the ring. Then the lord fell in
love with the gypsy and married her. But ere long she too died, and
was buried, and the ring with her. And from that day the lord seemed
as if possessed to sit by her grave, and finally built a house there,
and never seemed happy save when in it.

"If a Roumanian maid," says Mrs. Gerard, "desires to see her future
husband's face in the water she has only to step naked at midnight
into the nearest lake or river, or, if she shrink from this, let her
take a stand on the more congenial dung-hill with a piece of Christmas
cake in her mouth, and as the clock strikes twelve listen attentively
for the first sound of a dog's bark. From whichever side it proceeds
will also come the expected suitor."

A naked maid standing on a "congenial dung-hill" with a piece of
Christmas cake in her mouth would be a subject for an artist which
should be eagerly seized in these days when "excuses for the nude in
art" are becoming so rare. It is worth observing that this conjuration
is very much like one observed in Tuscany, in which Saint Anthony is
invoked to manifest by a dog's barking at night, as by other sounds,
whether the applicant, or invoker, shall obtain her desire.

At the birth of a child in Wallachia every one present takes a stone
and throws it behind him, saying, "This into the jaws of the Streghoi"
[16]--"a custom," says Mrs. Gerard, "which would seem to suggest
Saturn and the swaddled up stones." It is much more suggestive of
the stones thrown by Deucalion and Pyrrha. Strigoi is translated as
"evil spirits"--it is evidently, originally at least, the streghe,
or witches of Italy, from the Latin strix, the dreaded witch-bird
of Ovid. "Festus derives the word à stringendo from the opinion that
they strangle children." Middle Latin strega (Paulus Grillandus). For
much learning on this subject of the Strix the reader may consult De
Gubernatis, "Myth of Animals," vol. ii. p. 202.

"As long as the child is unbaptized it must be carefully watched for
fear lest it be changed or stolen away." This is common to Christians,
heathen, and gypsies to watch it for several days. "A piece of iron,
or a broom laid beneath the pillow will keep spirits away." So in
Roumania and Tuscany. Quintus Serenus, however, recommends that when
the striga atra presses the infant, garlic be used, the strong odour
of which (to their credit be it said) is greatly detested by witches.

"The Romans used to cook their coena demonum for the house-spirits,
and the Hindoos prepared food for them." From them it has passed
through the gypsies to Eastern Europe, and now the Roumanian, who
has by a simple ceremony made a contract with the devil, receives
from him an attendant spirit called a spiridsui or spiridush which will


   "Serve his master faithfully
    For seven long year,"


but in return expecting the first mouthful of every dish eaten by
his master.


   "So many differing fancies have mankind,
    That they the master-sprites may spell and bind."


Nearly connected with the Roumanian we have the beliefs in magic of
the Transylvanian Saxons, all of them shared with the gypsies and
probably partially derived from them. Many people must have wondered
what could have been the origin of the saying in reference to a very
small place that "there was not room to swing a cat in it." "But I
don't want to swing a cat in it," was the very natural rejoinder
of a well-known American litterateur to this remark applied to
his house. It is possible that we may find the origin of this odd
saying in a superstition current in Transylvania, whither it in all
probability was carried by the gypsies, whose specialty it is to
bear the seeds of superstitions about here and there as the winds
do those of plants. In this country it is said that if a cat runs
away, when recovered she must be swung three times round to attach
her to the dwelling. The same is done by a stolen cat by the thief
if he would retain it. Truly this seems a strange way to induce an
attachment--or pour encourager les autres. It is evident, however,
that to the professional cat-stealer the size of his room must be a
matter of some importance. It is a pity that this saying and faith
were unknown to Moncrief-Maradan, "the Historiogriffe of Cats,"
("OEuvres," Paris, 1794), who would assuredly have made the most of it.

As regards entering new houses in Transylvania the rule is not "Devil
take the hindmost," but the foremost. The first person or being who
enters the maiden mansion must die, therefore it is safe to throw in
a preliminary dog or cat. The scape-cat is, however, to be preferred.

I can remember once, when about six years of age, looking down into
a well in Massachusetts and being told that the reflection which I
saw was the face of a little boy who lived there. This made a deep
impression on me, and I reflected that it was very remarkable that
the dweller in the well could assume the appearance of every one who
looked at him. In Transylvania it is, says Mrs. E. Gerard, "dangerous
to stare down long into a well, for the well-dame who dwells at the
bottom is easily offended. But children are often curious, and so,
bending over the edge, they call out mockingly, 'Dame of the Well,
pull me down into it!' and then run away rapidly."

Whoever has been robbed and wishes to find the thief should take a
black hen, and for nine Fridays must with the hen fast strictly; the
thief will then either bring back the plunder or die. This is called
"taking up the black fast" against any one. It is said that a peasant
of Petersdorf returned one day from Bistritz with 200 florins, which
he had received for oxen. Being very tipsy he laid down to sleep,
having first hidden his money in a hole in the kitchen wall. When he
awoke he missed his coin, and having quite forgotten what he had done
with it believed it had been stolen. So he went to an old Wallachian,
probably a gypsy, and induced him to take up the black fast against
the thief. But as he himself had the money the spell worked against
him and he grew weaker and pined away as it went on. By some chance
at the last moment he found his money, but it was too late, and
he died. Pages of black hen-lore may be gathered from the works of
Friedrich, De Gubernatis and others; suffice it to say that Bubastis,
the Egyptian moon-goddess, appears to have been the original mistress
of the mysterious animal, if not the black hen as well as cat herself,
and mother of all the witches.

Magic qualities are attached in Hungary as in Germany to the lime
or linden tree; in some villages it is usual to plant one before a
house to prevent witches from entering. From very early times the
lime tree was sacred to Venus among the Greeks, as it was to Lada
among the Slavonians. This, it is said, was due to its leaves being
of the shape of a heart. In a Slavonian love-song the wooer exclaims:--


   "As the bee is drawn by the lime-perfume (or linden-bloom)
    My heart is drawn by thee."


This was transmitted to Christian symbolism, whence the penance laid
by Christ on Mary Magdalen was that "she should have no other food
save lime-tree leaves, drink naught except the dew which hung on
them, and sleep on no other bed save one made of its leaves" (Menzel,
"Christliche Symbolik," vol. ii. p. 57). "For Magdalena had loved much,
therefore her penance was by means of that which is a symbol of love."

Mrs. Gerard tells us that "a particular growth of vine leaf, whose
exact definition I have not succeeded in rightly ascertaining, is
eagerly sought by Saxon girls in some villages. Whoever finds it,
puts it in her hair, and if she then kisses the first man she meets on
her way home she will soon be married. A story is related of a girl,
who having found this growth, meeting a nobleman in a carriage stopped
the horses and begged leave to kiss him." To which he consented. This
particular growth, unknown to Mrs. Gerard, is when the leaves or
tendrils or shoots form a natural knot. Among the gypsies in Hungary,
as may be elsewhere read, such knots in the willow are esteemed as
of great magic efficacy in love. A knot is a symbol of true love in
all countries.


   "This knot I tie, this knot I knit,
    For that true love whom I know not yet."


On Easter Monday in Transylvania the lads run about the towns and
villages sprinkling with water all the girls or women whom they
meet. This is supposed to cause the flax to grow well. On the following
day the girls return the attention by watering the boys. "This
custom, which appears to be a very old one," says Mrs. Gerard, "is
also prevalent among various Slav races, such as Poles and Serbs. In
Poland it used to be de rigeur that water be poured over a girl who
was still asleep, so in every house a victim was selected who had
to feign sleep and patiently receive the cold shower-bath, which was
to ensure the luck of the family during the year. The custom has now
become modified to suit a more delicate age, and instead of formidable
horse-buckets of water, dainty little perfume squirts have come to
be used in many places." As the custom not only of sprinkling water,
but also of squirting or spraying perfumes is from ancient India (as
it is indeed prevalent all over the East), it is probable that the
gypsies who are always foremost in all festivals may have brought this
"holi" custom to Eastern Europe. Of late it has extended to London,
as appears by the following extract from The St. James's Gazette,
April, 1889.


   "The newest weapon of terror in the West End is the 'scent
    revolver.' Its use is simple. You dine--not wisely but the other
    thing--and then you stroll into the Park, with your nickel-plated
    scent revolver in your pocket. Feeling disposed for a frolic,
    you walk up to a woman, present your weapon, pull the trigger,
    and in a moment she is drenched, not with gore but with scent,
    which is nearly as unpleasant if not quite so deadly. Mr. Andrew
    King, who amused himself in that way, has been fined 10s. at
    Marlborough Street. Let us hope that the 'revolver' was confiscated
    into the bargain."


One way of interrogating fate in love affairs is to slice an apple in
two with a sharp knife; if this can be done without cutting a seed
the wish of the heart will be fulfilled. Of yore, in many lands the
apple was ever sacred to love, wisdom, and divination. Once in Germany
a well-formed child became, through bewitchment, sorely crooked and
cramped; by the advice of a monk the mother cut an apple in three
pieces and made the child eat them, whereupon it became as before. In
Illzach, in Alsace, there is a custom called "Andresle." On Saint
Andrew's Eve a girl must take from a widow, and without returning
thanks for it, an apple. As in Hungary she cuts it in two and must
eat one half of it before midnight, and the other half after it; then
in sleep she will see her future husband. And there is yet another
love-spell of the split apple given by Scheible ("Die gute alte Zeit,"
Stuttgart, 1847, p. 297) which runs as follows:--


   "On Friday early as may be,
    Take the fairest apple from a tree,
    Then in thy blood on paper white
    Thy own name and thy true love's write,
    That apple thou in two shalt cut,
    And for its cure that paper put,
    With two sharp pins of myrtle wood
    Join the halves till it seem good,
    In the oven let it dry,
    And wrapped in leaves of myrtle lie,
    Under the pillow of thy dear,
    Yet let it be unknown to her;
    And if it a secret be
    She soon will show her love for thee."


Similar apple sorceries were known to the Norsemen. Because the apple
was so nearly connected with love and luxury--"Geschlechtsliebe und
Zeugungslust"--those who were initiated in the mysteries and vowed to
chastity were forbidden to eat it. And for the same reason apples,
hares, and Cupids, or "Amorets," were often depicted together. In
Genesis, as in the Canticles of Solomon, apples, or at least the fruit
from which the modern apple inherited its traditions are a symbol of
sexual love. In Florence women wishing for children go to a priest and
get from him a blessed apple, over which they pronounce an incantation
to Santa Anna--la San' Na--who was the Lucina of the Latins.








CHAPTER IX.

THE RENDEZVOUS OR MEETINGS OF WITCHES, SORCERERS, AND VILAS.--A
CONTINUATION OF SOUTH SLAVONIAN GYPSY-LORE.


In Eastern Europe witches and their kin, or kind, assemble on
the eve of Saint John and of Saint George, Christmas and Easter,
at cross-roads on the broad pustas, or prairies, and there brew
their magic potions. This, as Dr. Krauss observes, originated in
feasts held at the same time in pre-Christian times. "So it was
that a thousand years ago old and young assembled in woods or on
plains to bring gifts to their gods, and celebrated with dances,
games, and offerings the festival of spring, or of awaking and
blooming Nature. These celebrations have taken Christian names, but
innumerable old heathen rites and customs are still to be found in
them." It may be here observed that mingled with these are many of
a purely gypsy-Oriental origin, which came from the same source and
which it remains for careful ethnologists and critical Folk-lorists
to disentangle and make clear. The priestesses of prehistoric times
on these occasions performed ceremonies, as was natural, to protect
cattle or land from evil influences. To honour their deities the "wise
women" bore certain kinds of boughs and adorned animals with flowers
and wreaths. The new religion declared that this was all sorcery and
devil-work, but the belief in the efficacy of the rites continued. The
priestesses became witches, or Vilas, the terms being often confused,
but they were still feared and revered.

In all the South Slavonian country the peasants on Saint George's
Day adorn the horns of cattle with garlands, in gypsy Indian style,
to protect them from evil influences. I have observed that even in
Egypt among Mahometans Saint George is regarded with great reverence,
and I knew one who on this day always sacrificed a sheep. The cow or ox
which is not thus decorated becomes a prey in some way to witches. The
garlands are hung up at night over the stable door, where they remain
all the ensuing year. If a peasant neglects to crown his cow, he not
only does not receive a certain fee from its owner, but is in danger
of being beaten. On the same day the shepherdess, or cow-herd, takes
in one hand salt, in the other a potsherd containing live coals. In
the coals roses are burned. By this means witches lose all power over
the animal. Near Karlstadt the mistress of the family merely strikes
it with a cross to produce the same effect.

Among the Transylvanian Hungarian gypsies there is a magical
ceremony performed on Saint George's Day, traces of which may be
found in England. Then the girls bake a peculiar kind of cake, in
which certain herbs are mixed, and which Dr. von Wlislocki declares
has an agreeable taste. This is divided among friends and foes, and it
is believed to have the property of reconciling the bitterest enemies
and of increasing the love of friends. But it is most efficient as a
love-charm, especially when given by women to men. The following gypsy
song commemorates a deed of this kind by a husband, who recurred to
it with joy:--


   "Kásáve romñi ná jidel,
    Ke kásávo maro the del;
    Sar m're gule lele pekel
    Káná Sváto Gordye ável.

   "Furmuntel bute luludya
    Furmuntel yoy bute charma
    Andre petrel but kámábe
    Ko chal robo avla bake."

   "No one bakes such bread as my wife, such as she baked me on
    St. George's Day. Many flowers and dew were kneaded into the cake
    with love. Whoever eats of it will be her slave."


In England I was told by an old gypsy woman named Lizzie Buckland,
that in the old time gypsy girls made a peculiar kind of cake, a Romany
morriclo, which they baked especially for their lovers, and used to
throw to them over the hedge by night. To make it more acceptable,
and probably to facilitate the action of the charm, they would put
money into the cake. It was observed of old among the Romans that
fascinatio began with flattery, compliments, and presents!

On the night of Saint John the witch climbs to the top of the hurdle
fence which surrounds the cow-yard, and sings the following spell:--


   "K meni sir,
    K meni maslo,
    K meni puter,
    K meni mleko
    Avam pak kravsku kozu!"

   "To me the cheese,
    To me the tallow (or meat),
    To me the butter,
    To me the milk,
    To you only the cowhide."


Or, as it may be expressed in rhyme:--


   "The cheese, meat, butter, and milk for me,
    But only the cowhide left for thee."


Then the cow will die, the carcass be buried, and the skin sold. To
prevent all this the owner goes early on St. John's Day to the
meadow and gathers the morning dew in a cloak. This he carries home,
and after binding the cow to a beam washes her with it. She is then
milked, and it is believed that if all has gone right she will yield
four bucketsful.

In the chapter on "Conjurations and Exorcisms among the Hungarian
Gypsies," I have mentioned the importance which they attach to the
being born a seventh or twelfth child. This is the same throughout
South Slavonia, where the belief that such persons in a series of
births are exceptionally gifted is "shared by both gypsies, with whom
it probably originated, and the peasants. What renders this almost
certain is that Dr. Krauss mentions that the oldest information as to
the subject among the Slavs dates only from 1854, while the faith is
ancient among the gypsies. He refers here to the so-called Kerstniki,
who on the eve of St. John do battle with the witches. Krstnik is
a Greek word, meaning, literally, one who has been baptized. But the
Krstnik proper is the youngest of twelve brothers, all sons of the same
father. There appears to be some confusion and uncertainty among the
Slavs as to whether all the twelve brothers or only the twelfth are
"Krstnik"--according to the gypsy faith it would be the latter. These
"twelvers" are the great protectors of the world from witchcraft. [17]
But they are in great danger on Saint John's Eve, for then the witches,
having most power, assail them with sticks and stakes, or stumps of
saplings, for which reason it is usual in the autumn to carefully
remove everything of the kind from the ground.

A krstnik is described by Miklosic as "Clovek kterega vile
obljubiju"--"A man who has won the love of a Vila." The Vila ladies,
or a certain class of them, are extremely desirous of contracting the
closest intimacy--in short, of becoming the mistresses, of superior
men. The reader may find numerous anecdotes of such amours in the
"Curiosa" of Heinrich Kornmann, 1666, and in my "Egyptian Sketch Book"
(Trübner & Co., London, 1874). In the heathen days, as at present among
all gypsies and Orientals, it was believed to be a wonderfully lucky
thing for a man to get the love of one of these beautiful beings. What
the difficulties were which kept them from finding lovers is not very
clear, unless it were that the latter must be twelfth sons, or, what
is far more difficult to find, young men who would not gossip about
their supernatural sweethearts to other mortals, who would remain
true to them, and who finally would implicitly obey all their commands
and follow their advice. There is a vast array of tales--Gypsy, Arab,
Provençal, Norman, German, and Scandinavian, which show that on these
points the Vila, or forest-maiden, or spirit of earth or air, or fairy,
was absolutely exacting and implacable, being herself probably allowed
by occult laws to contract an intimacy only with men of a high order,
or such as are--


    "Few in a heap and very hard to find."


On the other hand, the Vila yearns intensely for men and their
near company, because there is about those who have been baptized a
certain perfume or odour of sanctity, and as the unfortunate nymph is
not immortal herself, she likes to get even an association or sniff
of it from those who are. According to the Rosicrucian Mythology,
as set forth in the "Undine" of La Motte Fouqué, she may acquire a
soul by marrying a man who will be faithful to her--which accounts
for the fact that so few Undines live for ever. However this may be,
it appears that the Krstniki are specially favoured, and frequently
invited by the Vilas to step in--generally to a hollow tree--and make
a call. The hollow tree proves to be a door to Fairyland, and the
call a residence of seven days, which on returning home the caller
finds were seven years, for--


    "When we are pleasantly employed, time flies."


These spirits have one point in common with their gypsy friends--they
steal children--with this difference, that the Vila only takes those
which have been baptized, while the gypsy--at present, at least--is
probably not particular in this respect. But I have very little
doubt that originally one motive, and perhaps the only one which
induced these thefts, was the desire of the gypsies, as heathens
and sorcerers, to have among them, "for luck," a child which had
received the initiation into that mysterious religion from which
they were excluded, and which, as many of their charms and spells
prove, they really regarded as a higher magic. It is on this ground
only, or for this sole reason, that we can comprehend many of the
child-stealings effected by gypsies; for it is absolutely true that,
very often when they have large families of their own, they will,
for no apparent cause whatever, neither for the sake of plunder,
profit, or revenge, adopt or steal some poor child and bring it up,
kindly enough after their rough fashion; and in doing this they are
influenced, as I firmly believe, far more by a superstitious feeling
of bak, or luck, and the desire to have a Mascot in the tent, than any
other. That children have been robbed or stolen for revenge does not
in the least disprove what I believe--that in most cases the motive
for the deed is simply superstition.

On the eve of Saint George old women cut thistle-twigs and bring them
to the door of the stall. This is only another form of the nettle
which enters so largely into the Hungarian gypsy incantations, and
they also make crosses with cowdung on the doors. This is directly
of Indian origin, and points to gypsy tradition. Others drive large
nails into the doors--also a curious relic of a widely-spread ancient
custom, of which a trace may be found in the Vienna Stock im Eisen,
or trunk driven full of nails by wandering apprentices, which may be
seen near the church of Saint Stephen. But the thistle-twigs are still
held to be by far the most efficacious. In Vinica, or near it, these
twigs are cut before sunset. They are laid separately in many places,
but are especially placed in garlands on the necks of cattle. If
a witch, in spite of these precautions, contrives to get into the
stable, all will go wrong with the beasts during the coming year.

Now there was once a man who would have none of this thistle work--nay,
he mocked at those who believed in it. So it came to pass that all
through the year witches came every night and milked his cows. And
he reflected, "I must find out who does this!" So he hid himself in
the hay and kept sharp watch. All at once, about eleven o'clock,
there came in a milk-pail, which moved of its own accord, and the
cows began to let down their milk into it. The farmer sprang out and
kicked it over. Then it changed into a tremendous toad which turned
to attack him, so that in terror he took refuge in his house. That
proved to be a lucky thing for him. A week after came the day of Saint
George. Then he hung thistle-twigs on his stable door, and after that
his cows gave milk in plenty.

Witches may be seen on Saint George's Day, and that unseen by them if
a man will do as follows: He must rise before the sun, turn all his
clothes inside out and then put them on. Then he must cut a green
turf and place it on his head. Thus he becomes invisible, for the
witches believe he is under the earth, being themselves apparently
bewitched by this.

Very early on the day of Saint George, or before sunrise, the witches
climb into the church belfry to get the grease from the axle on which
the bell swings, and a piece of the bell-rope, for these things are
essential to them. Dr. Krauss observes that in the MS. from which
he took this, schmierfetet or axle-grease, is indicated by the word
svierc, "in which one at once recognizes the German word schwartz,
a black." It is remarkable that the Chippeway and other Algonkin
Indians attach particular value to the black dye made from the grease
of the axle of a grindstone.

The extraordinary pains which they took to obtain this had attracted
the attention of a man in Minnesota, who told me of it. It required
a whole day to obtain a very little of it. The Indians, when asked by
curious white people what this was for, said it was for dyeing baskets,
but, as my informant observed, the quantity obtained was utterly
inadequate to any such purpose, and even better black dyes (e.g.,
hickory bark and alum) are known to, and can be very easily obtained
by, them. The real object was to use the grease in "medicine," i.e.,
for sorcery. The eagerness of both witches in Europe and Indians in
America to obtain such a singular substance is very strange. However,
the idea must be a recent one among the Indians, for there were
certainly no grindstones among them before the coming of the white men.


   "For all that I can tell, said he,
    Is that it is a mystery."


Heathens though they be, many gypsies have a superstitious belief in
the efficacy of the sacramental bread and wine, and there are many
instances of their stealing them for magical purposes. So in the
Middle Ages witches and sorcerers used these objects for the most
singular purposes, Paulus Grillandus, in his "Tractatus de Hereticis
et Sortilegiis," &c. (Lyons, 1547), assuring his readers that he had
known a witch who had two holy wafers inscribed with magical characters
which she used for debauching innocent girls and betraying them to men,
and that it was a belief that if a woman had the sacred oil fresh on
her lips no man could refrain from kissing her. This is the union of
two kinds of magic; a view which never once occurred to theological
writers. And here I may appropriately mention that while the proofs of
this work were passing through my hands accident threw into my way an
extremely rare work, which illustrates to perfection the identity of
popular and ecclesiastical sorcery. This is entitled "De Effectibus
Magicis, ac de Nuce Maga Beneventana," "Six Books of Magic Effects
and of the Witch Walnut-tree of Benevento. A work necessary, joyous,
and useful to Astrologists, Philosophers, Physicians, Exorcists,
and Doctors, and Students of Holy Scriptures. By the Chief Physician,
Peter Piperno." It appears to have been privately printed at Naples
in 1647, and came from a conventual library. It bore, written on a
fly-leaf, the word Proibito.

In it every kind of disorder or disease is declared to be caused
by devils and witches. The author believes with Delrio that disease
entered into the world as a consequence of sin (referenda sit ad primæ
nostræ matris peccatum)--a view held by John Milton; hence, of course,
all disease is caused solely by the devil. In his volume of two hundred
large and close pages, our Peter Piperno displays a vast erudition on
the origin of devils and diseases, is bitter on the rival school of
magical practitioners who use cures and incantations unlike his own,
and then gives us the name and nature of all diseases, according to the
different parts of the body, &c., the medical prescriptions proper for
them, and what is, in his opinion, most needful of all, the incantation
or exorcism to be pronounced. Sometimes there are several of these,
as one for making up a pill, another on taking it, &c. There are also
general conjurations--I mean benedictions--for the medicines altogether
or in particular, such as the Benedictio Syruporum, "The Blessing of
the Syrups," and there is a very affecting and appropriately moving one
for making or taking Castor Oil, and oils of all kinds, as follows:--


   "Benedictio Olei.

   "This begins with the In nomine Patris, &c., and Adjutorium
    nostrum, &c., and then:

   "I exorcise you all aromatics, herbs, roots, seeds, stones, gums,
    and whatever is to be compounded with this oil, by God the Father,
    God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, by the God triune yet one,
    by the holy and single Trinity, that the impure Spirit depart from
    you, and with it every incursion of Satan, every fraud of the
    Enemy, every evil of the Devil, and that mixed with oil you may
    free the subject from all infirmities, incantations, bindings,
    witchcrafts, from all diabolical fraud, art, and power, by the
    merits of our Lord Jesus Christ and the most beloved Virgin Mary,
    and of all the saints. Amen."


The curses for the devils of colds, fevers, rheumatisms, gouts,
stomach-aches, &c., are awful, both in number, length, and quality;
enough to frighten a cowboy or "exhort an impenitent mule" into
docility. There is the Exorcismus terribilis, or "Terrible Exorcism"
of Saint Zeno, in which the disorder is addressed literally as "A
dirty, false, heretical, drunken, lewd, proud, envious, deceitful,
vile, swindling, stupid devil"--with some twenty more epithets which,
if applied in these our days to the devil himself, would ground an
action for libel and bring heavy damages in any court. It is to be
remarked that in many prescriptions the author adds to legitimate
remedies, ingredients which are simply taken from popular necromancy,
or witchcraft, as for instance, rue--fugæ dæmonum--verbena, and
artemisia, all of which are still in use in Tuscany against sorcery
and the evil eye.

The really magical character of these exorcisms is shown by the vast
array of strange words used in them, many of which have a common
source with those used by sorcerers of the Cabalistic or Agrippa
school, such as Agla, Tetragrammaton, Adonai, Fons, Origo, Serpens,
Avis, Leo, Imago, Sol, Floy, Vitis, Mons, Lapis, Angularis, Ischyros,
Pantheon, all of which are old heathen terms of incantation. These
are called in the exorcism "words by virtue of which"--per virtutem
istorum verborum--the devils are invited to depart. The whole is as
much a work of sorcery as any ever inscribed in a catalogue of occulta,
and it was as a specimen of occulta that I bought it.








CHAPTER X.

OF THE HAUNTS, HOMES, AND HABITS OF WITCHES IN THE SOUTH SLAVIC
LANDS.--BOGEYS AND HUMBUGS.


The witches in Slavonian gipsy-lore have now and then parties which
meet to spin, always by full moonlight on a cross-road. But it is not
advisable, says Krauss, to pass by on such occasions, as the least they
do to the heedless wayfarer is to bewitch and sink him into a deep
sleep. But they are particularly fond of assembling socially in the
tops of trees, especially of the ash, walnut, and linden or lime kinds,
preferring those whose branches grow in the manner here depicted.

It is but a few days ago, as I write, that I observed all along the
route from Padua to Florence thousands of trees supporting vines,
which trees had been trained to take this form, the farmers being as
much influenced by "luck" in so doing as utility; for it is not really
essential that the tree shall so exactly receive this shape, to hold
a vine, as is proved by the fact that there are plantations here and
there where this method of training the trees is not observed. It is
very suggestive of the triçula or trident of Siva, which originated
the trushul, or cross of the gypsies. As regards the properties of
the ash tree Krauss remarks that "roots with magic power grew under
ash trees," and quotes a song of a maiden who, having learned that
her lover is untrue, replies:--


   "Ima trava u okolo Save,
    I korenja okolo jasenja,"

   "There are herbs by the Save,
    And roots around ash trees,"


--meaning that she can prepare a love-potion from these. There is
in the Edda a passage in which we are also told that there are magic
powers in the roots of trees, the reference being probably to the ash,
and possibly to the alraun, or images made of its roots, which are
sometimes misnamed mandrakes.

Other resorts of Slavonian gypsy witches are near or in deep woods and
ravines, also on dung-hills, or places where ashes, lye, or rubbish
is thrown, or among dense bushes. Or as soon as the sun sets they
assemble in orchards of plum trees, or among ancient ruins, while on
summer nights they hold their revels in barns, old hollow trees, by
dark hedges or in subterranean caverns. The peasants greatly dread
dung-hills after dark, for fear of cruel treatment by them. When
a wild wind is blowing the witches love dearly to dance. Then they
whirl about in eddying figures and capers, and when the sweat falls
from them woe to the man who treads upon it!--for he will become at
once dumb or lame, and may be called lucky should he escape with only
an inflammation of the lungs. In fact, if a man even walks in a place
where witches have been he will become bewildered or mad, and remain
so till driven homeward by hunger. But such places may generally be
recognized by their footprints in the sand; for witches have only four
toes--the great toe being wanting. These mysterious four toe-tracks,
which are indeed often seen, are supposed by unbelievers to be made
by wild geese, swans, or wild ducks, but in reply to this the peasant
or gypsy declares that witches often take the form of such fowl. And
there is, moreover, much Rabbinical tradition which proves that the
devil and his friends have feet like peacocks, which are notoriously
birds of evil omen, as is set forth by a contributor to The St. James's
Gazette, November 16, 1888:--


   "Again, take peacocks. Nobody who has not gone exhaustively into
    the subject can have any adequate idea of the amount of general
    inconvenience diffused by a peacock. Broken hearts, broken limbs,
    pecuniary reverses, and various forms of infectious disease have
    all been traced to the presence of a peacock, or even a peacock
    feather, on the premises."


The evil reputation of the peacock is due to his having been the only
creature who was induced to show Satan the way into Paradise. (For a
poem on this subject, vide "Legends of the Birds," by C. G. Leland,
Philadelphia, 1864).

If any one should by chance pop in--like Tam O'Shanter--to an assembly
of witches, he must at once quickly cover his head, make the sign of
the cross, take three steps backwards and a fourth forwards. Then the
witches cannot injure him. Should a gentleman in London or Brighton
abruptly intrude into a five o'clock tea, while Peel or Primrose
witches are discussing some specially racy scandal, he should,
however, make instantly so many steps backwards as will take him to
his overcoat or cane, and then, after a turn, so many down-stairs as
will bring him into the street.

If any man should take in his hand from the garden fence anything
which a witch has laid there, he will in the same year fall sick,
and if he has played with it he must die. There be land-witches and
water-witches--whoever goes to swim in a place where these latter
are found will drown and his body never be recovered. Sometimes in
these places the water is very deep, but perfectly clear, in others
it is still and very muddy, to which no one can come within seven
paces because of an abominable and stifling vapour. And, moreover,
as a dead cat is generally seen swimming on the top of such pools,
no one need be endangered by them.

The fact that the gypsy and South Slavonian or Hungarian Folklore
is directly derived from classic or Oriental sources is evident from
the fact that the Shemitic-Persian devil, who is the head and body of
all witchcraft in Western Europe, very seldom appears in that of the
Eastern parts. The witches there seem invariably to derive their art
from one another; even in Venice they have no unusual fear of death
or of a future state. A witch who has received the gift or power of
sorcery cannot die till she transfers it to another, and this she
often finds it difficult to do, as is illustrated by a story told me
in Florence in 1886 by the same girl to whom I have already referred.


   "There was a girl here in the city who became a witch against her
    will. And how? She was ill in a hospital, and by her in a bed was
    una vecchia, ammalata gravamente, e non poteva morire--an old
    woman seriously ill, yet who could not die. And the old woman
    groaned and cried continually, 'Oimé! muoio! A chi lasció? non
    diceva che.' 'Alas! to whom shall I leave?'--but she did not say
    what. Then the poor girl, thinking of course she meant property,
    said: 'Lasciate à me--son tanto povera!' ('Leave it to me--I am
    so poor.') At once the old woman died, and 'La povera giovana
    se é trovato in eredita delta streghoneria'--the poor girl found
    she had inherited witchcraft.

   "Now the girl went home, where she lived with her brother and
    mother. And having become a witch she began to go out often by
    night, which the mother observing, said to her son, 'Qualche volta
    tu troverai tua sorella colla pancia grossa.' ('Some day you will
    find your sister with child.') 'Don't think such a thing, mamma,'
    he replied. 'However, I will find out where it is she goes.'

   "So he watched, and one night he saw his sister go out of the
    door, sullo punto delta mezza notte--just at midnight. Then he
    caught her by the hair, and twisted it round his arm. She began
    to scream terribly, when--ecco! there came running a great number
    of cats--e cominciarono a miolare, e fare un gran chiasso--they
    began to mew and make a great row, and for an hour the sister
    struggled to escape--but in vain, for her hair was fast--and
    screamed while the cats screeched, till it struck one, when the
    cats vanished and the sorella was insensible. But from that time
    she had no witchcraft in her, and became a buona donna, or good
    girl, as she had been before--'come era prima.'"


It is very evident that in this story there is no diabolical agency,
and that the witchcraft is simply a quality which is transferred like a
disease, and which may be removed. Thus in Venice--where, as is evident
from the works of Bernoni, the witches are of Gypsy-Slavic-Greek
origin--a witch loses all her power if made to shed even one drop of
blood, or sometimes if she be defeated or found out to be a witch. In
none of these countries has she received the horrible character of
a mere instrument of a stupendous evil power, whose entire will and
work is to damn all mankind (already full of original sin) to eternal
torture. For this ne plus ultra of horror could only result from
the Hebrew-Persian conception of perfect malignity, incarnate as an
anti-god, and be developed by gloomy ascetics who begrudged mankind
every smile and every gleam of sunlight. In India and Eastern Europe
the witch and demon are simply awful powers of nature, like thunder
and pestilence, darkness and malaria, they nowhere appear as aiming at
destroying the soul. For such an idea as this it required a theology
and mythology emanating from the basis of an absolutely perfect
monotheos, which gave birth to an antithesis; infinite good, when
concentrated, naturally suggesting a shadow counterpart of evil. In
Eastern Europe the witch is, indeed, still confused with the Vila,
who was once, and often still is, a benevolent elementary spirit,
who often punishes only the bad, and gladly favours the good. It is
as curious as it is interesting to see how, under the influence of
the Church, everything which was not directly connected with the
current theology was made to turn sour and bitter and poisonous,
and how darkness and frost stole over flowery fields which once were
gay in genial sunshine. It is a necessary result that in attaining
higher ideals the lesser must fade or change. Devilism, or the dread
of the child and savage of the powers of darkness and mysterious evil,
ends by incarnating all that is painful or terrible in evil spirits,
which suggest their opposites. From Devilism results Polytheism,
with one leading and good spirit, who in time becomes supreme. Then
we have Monotheism. But as evil still exists, it is supposed that
there are innately evil powers or spirits who oppose the good. By
following the same process the leader of these becomes an anti-type,
Lucifer, or Satan, or arch-devil, the result being Dualism. In this
we have a spirit endowed with incredible activity and power, who
is only not omnipotent, and whose malignity far transcends anything
attributed to the gods or devils of Polytheism. His constant aim is
to damn all mankind to all eternity, and his power is so great that
to save even a small portion of mankind from this fate, God himself,
or His own Son, must undergo penance as a man--an idea found in the
Buddhism of India. This is all the regular and logical sequence of
Fetishism and Shamanism. Witchcraft, and the tales told of it, follow
in the path of the religion of the age. In the earliest time women were
apparently the only physicians--that is to say magicians--and as man
was in his lowest stage the magic was a vile witchcraft. Then came the
Shaman--a man who taught in Animism a more refined sorcery, which was,
however, as yet the only religion. But the witch still existed, and
so she continued to exist, pari passu, through all the developments
of religion. And to this, day every form and phase of the magician
and witch exist somewhere, it sometimes happening that traces of the
earliest and most barbarous sorcery are plain and palpable in the
most advanced faith. There may be changes of name and of association,
but in simple truth it is all "magic" and nothing else.

Gypsy, Hungarian, Slavonian, Indian, and Italian witches, however
they may differ from those of Western Europe on theological grounds,
agree with them in meeting for the purposes of riotous dancing and
debauchery. It has been observed that this kind of erotic dancing
appears to have been cultivated in the East, and even in Europe,
from the earliest times, by a class of women who, if not absolutely
proved to be gypsies, had at any rate many points of resemblance with
them. "The Syrian girl who haunts the taverns round," described by
Virgil, suggests the Syrian and Egyptian dancer, who is evidently of
Indo-Persian--that is to say of Nuri, or gypsy--origin. The Spanish
dancing girls of remote antiquity have been conjectured to have
come from this universal Hindoo Romany stock. I have seen many of
the Almeh in Egypt--they all seemed to be gypsyish, and many were
absolutely of the Helebi, Nauar, or Rhagarin stocks. This is indeed
not proved--that all the deliberately cultivated profligate dancing
of the world is of Indo-Persian, or gypsy origin, but there is a
great deal, a very great deal, which renders it probable. And it
is remarkable that it occurred to Pierre Delancre that the Persian
ballerine had much in common with witches. Now the dancers of India
are said to have originated in ten thousand gypsies sent from Persia,
and who were of such vagabond habits that they could not be persuaded
to settle down anywhere. Of these Delancre says:--


   "The Persian girls dance at their sacrifices like witches at
    a Sabbat--that is naked--to the sound of an instrument. And
    the witches in their accursed assemblies are either entirely
    naked or en chemise, with a great cat clinging to their back,
    as many have at divers times confessed. The dame called Volta
    is the commonest and the most indecent. It is believed that the
    devil taught three kinds of dances to the witches of Ginevra, and
    these dances were very wild and rude, since in them they employed
    switches and sticks, as do those who teach animals to dance.

   "And there was in this country a girl to whom the devil had given
    a rod of iron, which had the power to make any one dance who
    was touched with it. She ridiculed the judges during her trial,
    declaring they could not make her die, but they found a way to
    blunt her petulance.

   "The devils danced with the most beautiful witches, in the form of
    a he-goat, or of any other animal, and coupled with them, so that
    no married woman or maid ever came back from these dances chaste
    as they had gone. They generally dance in a round, back to back,
    rarely a solo, or in pairs.

   "There are three kinds of witch-dances; the first is the trescone
    alia Boema, or the Bohemian rigadoon" (perhaps the polka), "the
    second is like that of some of our work-people in the country,
    that is to say by always jumping" (this may be like the Tyrolese
    dances), "the third with the back turned, as in the second
    rigadoon, in which all are drawn up holding one another by the
    hand, and in a certain cadence hustling or bumping one another,
    deretano contro deretano. These dances are to the sound of a
    tambourine, a flute, a violin, or of another instrument which
    is struck with a stick. Such is the only music of the Sabbat,
    and all witches assert that there are in the world no concerts
    so well executed."


"A tambourine, a violin, a flute," with perhaps a zimbel, which
is struck with a stick. Does not this describe to perfection gypsy
music, and is not the whole a picture of the wildest gypsy dancing
wherever found? Or it would apply to the Hindoo debauches, as still
celebrated in honour of Sakktya, "the female principle" in India. In
any case the suggestion is a very interesting one, since it leads to
the query as to whether the entire sisterhood of ancient strolling,
licentious dancers, whether Syrian, Spanish, or Egyptian, were not
possibly of Indian-gypsy origin, and whether, in their character as
fortune-tellers and sorceresses, they did not suggest the dances said
to be familiar to the witches.

Mr. David Ritchie, the editor, with Mr. Francis Groome, of the
Journal of the Gypsy-Lore Society, has mentioned (vol. i. No. 2)
that Klingsohr, a reputed author of the "Nibelungen Lied," was
described as a "Zingar wizard" by Dietrich the Thuringian. Like Odin,
this Klingsohr rode upon a wolf--a kind of steed much affected by
witches and sorcerers. There is an old English rhyming romance in
which a knight is represented as disguising himself as an Ethiopian
minstrel. These and other stories--as, for instance, that of Sir
Estmere--not only indicate a connection between the characters of
minstrel and magician, but suggest that some kind of men from the
far East first suggested the identity between them. Of course there
have been wild dancers and witches, and minstrel-sorcerers, or vates,
prophet-poets, in all countries, but it may also be borne in mind
that nowhere in history do we find the female erotic dancer and
fortune-teller, or witch, combined in such vast numbers as in India
and Persia, and that these were, and are, what may be truly called
gypsies. Forming from prehistoric times a caste, or distinct class,
it is very probable that they roamed from India to Spain, possibly here
and there all over Europe. The extraordinary diplomatic skill, energy,
and geographic knowledge displayed by the first band of gypsies who,
about 1417, succeeded in rapidly obtaining permits for their people
to wander in every country in Europe except England, indicate great
unity of plan and purpose. That these gypsies, as supposed sorcerers,
appearing in every country in Europe, should not have influenced
and coloured in some way the conceptions of witchcraft seems to be
incredible. If a superstitious man had never before in his life thought
of witches dancing to the devil's music, it might occur to him when
looking on at some of the performances of Spanish and Syrian gypsy
women, and if the man had previously been informed--as everybody was in
the fifteenth century or later--that these women were all witches and
sorceresses, it could hardly fail to occur to him that it was after
this fashion that the sisters danced at the Sabbat. Of which opinion
all that can be said is, that if not proved it is extremely possible,
and may be at least probed and looked into by those of the learned
who are desirous of clearly establishing all the grounds and origins
of ancient religious beliefs and superstitions, in which pies it may
be found that witches and gypsies have had fingers to a far greater
extent than grave historians have ever imagined.

The English gypsies believe in witches, among their own people, and
it is very remarkable that in such cases at least as I have heard of,
they do not regard them as âmes damnées or special limbs of Satan,
but rather as some kinds of exceptionally gifted sorceresses or
magicians. They are, however, feared from their supposed power to make
mischief. Such a witch may be known by her hair, which is straight
for three or four inches and then begins to curl--like a waterfall
which comes down smoothly and then rebounds roundly on the rocks. It
may be here remarked that all this gypsy conception of the witch is
distinctly Hindoo and not in the least European or of Christians, with
whom she is simply a human devil utterly given over to the devil's
desires. And it is very remarkable that even the English gypsies do
not associate such erring sisters--or any other kind--with the devil,
as is done by their more cultivated associates.

The witch, in gypsy as in other lore, is a haunting terror of the
night. It has not, that I am aware, ever been conjectured that the
word Humbug is derived from the Norse hum, meaning night, or shadows
(tenebræ) (Jonæo, "Icelandic Latin glossary in Niall's Saga"), and
bog, or bogey, termed in several old editions of the Bible a bug, or
"bugges." And as bogey came to mean a mere scarecrow, so the hum-bugges
or nightly terrors became synonymes for feigned frights. "A humbug,
a false alarm, a bug-bear" ("Dean Milles MS." Halliwell). The fact
that bug is specially applied to a nocturnal apparition, renders the
reason for the addition of hum very evident.

There is a great deal that is curious in this word Bogey. Bug-a-boo
is suggestive of the Slavonian Bog and Buh, both meaning God or a
spirit. Boo or bo is a hobgoblin in Yorkshire, so called because
it is said to be the first word which a ghost or one of his kind
utters to a human being, to frighten him. Hence, "he cannot say bo
to a goose." Hence boggart, bogle, boggle, bo-guest, i.e., bar-geist,
boll, boman, and, probably allied, bock (Devon), fear. Bull-beggar is
probably a form of bu and bogey or boge, allied to boll (Northern),
an apparition.








CHAPTER XI.

GYPSY WITCHCRAFT.--THE MAGICAL POWER WHICH IS INNATE IN ALL MEN
AND WOMEN--HOW IT MAY BE CULTIVATED AND DEVELOPED--THE PRINCIPLES
OF FORTUNE-TELLING.


Women excel in the manifestation of certain qualities which are
associated with mystery and suggestive of occult influences or
power. Perhaps the reader will pardon me if I devote a few pages to
what I conceive to be, to a certain degree, an explanation of this
magic; though, indeed, it may be justly said that in so doing we
only pass the old boundary of "spiritual" sorcery to find ourselves
in the wider wonderland of Science.

Whether it be the action of a faculty, a correlative action of physical
functions, or a separate soul in us, the fact is indisputable that
when our ordinary waking consciousness or will goes to sleep or rest,
or even dozes, that instant an entirely different power takes command
of the myriad forces of memory, and proceeds to make them act, wheel,
evolute, and perform dramatic tricks, such as the Common Sense of
our daily life would never admit. This power we call the Dream,
but it is more than that. It can do more than make Us, or Me, or the
Waking Will, believe that we are passing through fantastic scenes. It
can remember or revive the memory of things forgotten by us; it can,
when he is making no effort, solve for the geometrician problems which
are far beyond his waking capacity--it sometimes teaches the musician
airs such as he could not compose. That is to say, within ourself
there dwells a more mysterious Me, in some respects a more gifted
Self. There is not the least reason, in the present state of Science,
to assume that this is either a "spiritual" being or an action of
material forces. It puzzled Wigan as the dual action of the brain;
and a great light is thrown on it by the "Physiology" of Carpenter
and the "Memory" of David Kay (one of the most remarkable works of
modern times), as well as in the "Psycho Therapeutics" of Dr. Tuckey.

This power, therefore, knows things hidden from Me, and can do what
I cannot. Let no one incautiously exclaim here that what this really
means is, that I possess higher accomplishments which I do not use. The
power often actually acts against Me--it plays at fast and loose with
me--it tries to deceive me, and when it finds that in dreams I have
detected a blunder in the plot of the play which it is spinning, it
brings the whole abruptly to an end with the convulsion of a nightmare,
or by letting the curtain fall with a crash, and--scena est deserta--I
am awake! And then "how the phantoms flee--how the dreams depart!" as
Westwood writes. With what wonderful speed all is washed away clean
from the blackboard! Our waking visions do not fly like this. But--be
it noted, for it is positively true--the evanescence of our dreams is,
in a vast majority of instances, exactly in proportion to their folly.

I am coming to my witchcraft directly, but I pray you have patience
with my proeme. I wish to narrate a dream which I had a few years
ago (September 5, 1887), which had an intensity of reality. Dreams,
you know, reader, vary from rainbow mist to London fog, and so on to
clouds, or mud. This one was hard as marble in comparison to most. A
few days previously I had written a letter to a friend, in which I
had discussed this subject of the dual-Me, and it seemed as if the
Dream were called forth by it in answer.

I thought I was in my bed--a German one, for I was in Homburg vor der
Höhe--yet I did not know exactly where I was. I at once perceived the
anomaly, and was in great distress to know whether I was awake or in a
dream. I seemed to be an invalid. I realized, or knew, that in another
bed near mine was a nurse or attendant. I begged her to tell me if I
were dreaming, and to awake me if I were. She tried to persuade me that
I was in my ordinary life, awake. I was not at all satisfied. I arose
and went into the street. There I met with two or three common men. I
felt great hesitation in addressing them on such a singular subject,
but told them that I was in distress because I feared that I was in
a dream, and begged them to shake or squeeze my arm. I forget whether
they complied, but I went on and met three gentlemen, to whom I made
the same request. One at once promptly declared that he remembered
me, saying that we had met before in Cincinnatti. He pressed my arm,
but it had no effect. I began to believe that I was really awake. I
returned to the room. I heard a child speaking or murmuring by the
nurse. I asked her again to shake my hand. This she did so forcibly
that I was now perfectly convinced that it was no dream. And the
instant it came home to me that it was a reality, there seized me
the thrill or feeling as of a coming nightmare--and I awoke!

Reviewing my dream when awake, I had the deepest feeling of having
been joué or played with by a master-mocker. I recalled that, when
I rose in my night-robe from the bed, I did not dress--and yet found
myself fully dressed when in the street. Then I remembered that when
I returned to America, in 1879, I was in great apprehension lest
I should have trouble and delay with our sixteen trunks, because
there was under my charge a lady who was dying. To my great relief
and amazement, the officer whose duty it was to search claimed me as
an old acquaintance, who had met me and T. Buchanan Read, the poet,
in Cincinnatti in 1864. But what impressed me most of all, at once,
was that the whole was caused by, and was a keen and subtle mockery
of my comments in my letter, of the other Ego, and of its sarcastic
power. For I had been led, step by step, through the extremest doubt,
to a full conviction of being awake, and then dismissed, as it were,
with a snap or sneer into wakefulness itself!

Now this Dream Artist is, to judge by his works, a very different
kind of a person from Me. We are not sympathetic, and herein lies a
great and serious subject of study. "Dreams," says a writer, "are the
novels which we read when we are fast asleep," and, at the risk of
receiving punishment, I declare that my writer belongs to a school of
novelists with which I have no feelings in common. If, as everybody
assumes, it is always I who dream--only using other material--how
is it that I always invariably disagree with, thwart, contradict,
vex, and mock myself? I had rather be hanged and be done with it,
before I would wrong my worst enemy with such pitiful, silly, degrading
dreams and long-forgotten follies, as I am called on to endure. If this
alter-ego were a lunatic, he could not be a more thoroughly uncongenial
inmate of my brain than he often is. Our characters are radically
different. Why has he a mind so utterly unlike mine? His tastes,
his thoughts, dispositions, and petty peculiarities are all unlike
mine. If we belonged to the same club, I should never talk with him.

Now we are coming to our Witchcraft. This alter-ego does not confine
himself to dreams. A lunatic is a man who dreams wide-awake. He
has lost his will or the controlling power resulting from the just
co-relation of brain forces. Then the stored-up images stray out
and blend. I have dreamed of telling or seeing things and of acting
them at the same time. A fish and a watch and a man may seem to be
the same thing at once in a dream, as they often are to a waking
lunatic. A poet is a man who dreams wide-awake; but he can guide
his dreams or imaginings to symmetrical form, and to a logical
conclusion or coherence. With the painter and sculptor it is the
same. When the alter-ego works harmoniously with the waking will,
we call it Imagination.

But when the alter-ego draws decidedly on latent forces, or powers
unknown to the waking Me, I am amazed. He does it often enough,
that is certain. Then we have Mystery. And it is out of this that
men have drawn the conclusion that they have two or three souls--an
astral spirit, a power of prophecy, the art of leaving the body,
and the entire machinery of occultism. Physiology is probably on the
high road to explain it all, but as yet it is not explained.

Meanwhile it steals into our waking life in many ways. It comes
in emotions, presentiments, harp tones, mystical conceptions, and
minglings of images or ideas, and incomprehensible deductions, which
are sometimes, of course, prophetic. It has nothing in common with
common sense; therefore it is to some un-common sense, or to others
non-sense. Sometimes it is one or the other. Agreeable sensations and
their harmony become the Beautiful. These blend and produce a general
æsthetic sense. It becomes mystical, and is easily worked on by the
alter-ego. The most inspired passages of every poet on the beauty of
Nature betray clearly the influence and hidden power of the Dream
in waking life. Shelley, Wordsworth, Keats, Byron, were all waking
dreamers de la première force.

He who has heard an Æolian harp play--and I have heard the seven
of Justinus Kerner in the old castle of Weibertreu when I was his
guest--if he be a "tone-artist," has often caught series of chords
which were almost melodies. This music has the same relation to
definite composition which the dream has to waking common sense. There
are two things which I do not understand. One is, why composers of
music make so little use of the suggestive Æolian harp; the second
is, why decorative designers never employ the folding mirror [18]
to produce designs. The one is an exact counterpart of the other,
and both are capable of revealing inexhaustible harmonies, for both
are deeply in accordance with the evolving processes of Nature.

The poetic or artistic faculty is, we therefore assume, the action
on the myriad cells of memory by a strange--sometimes apparently
involuntary--fantastic power, which is at the same time higher and
lower than common sense or waking consciousness. Every image which
man has received from sensation lies stored away in a cell, and is,
in fact, a memory by itself. There is a faculty of association or
sympathy by which groups of these images are called up, and there
is perception which receives them, more or less vividly, like a
photographic plate. When awake, Will, or coherent Common Sense,
regulates all this machinery. When asleep, the Images seem to steal
out and blend and frisk about by themselves in quaint dances, guided
apparently by a kind of power whom I have conventionally called the
alter-ego. This power throws open brain or memory-cells, which waking
Common Sense has forgotten; in their chaotic or fantastic searches
and mingling they produce poetry; they may chance on prophecy, for
if our waking self had at command the immense latent knowledge in
which these elves revel, it would detect sequences and know to what
many things would lead, now unto us all unknown.

I once knew a nobleman who inherited in Italy a palace which he had
never seen. There were in it three hundred rooms, and it had belonged
to a family which had for six hundred years collected and handed
down to their descendants every kind of object, as if they had been
magpies or ravens. The heir, as a grave, earnest man, only concerned
himself with the armoury and picture gallery and principal rooms. But
his young daughter Bertha ranged all over the place and made hundreds
of the most singular discoveries. One day she came to me very much
delighted. She had found an obscure room or garret, in which there
were ranged about on shelves, "sitting up and all looking at her,"
several hundred old dolls and marionettes. For two hundred years or
more the family had kept its old dolls. In this case the father was
the waking reason, the rooms the brain cells, and Bertha the sprite who
ranges over all and knows where to find forgotten images in store. Many
of those whom we meet in dreams are like the ghosts of dolls.

This is the only true Night side of Nature, but its shadows and dusky
twilight, and strangely-hued chiaroscuros and long pauses of gloom,
come constantly into the sunlight of our waking life. Some lives
have too much of it, some too little. Some receive it in coarse and
evil forms, as lunatics, and sufferers from mania à potu; some canny
people--happy Scotchmen, for instance--succeed in banishing it from
life as nearly as is possible for a human being to do. Now to speak
clearly, and to recapitulate distinctly, I set forth the following
propositions:--

I. We have a conscious will which, whether it be an independent
incomprehensible spirit, or simply the correlative result or action of
all our other brain powers, exists, and during our waking hours directs
our thoughts and acts. While it is at work in the world with social
influences, its general tendency is towards average common sense.

II. This conscious will sleeps when we sleep. But the collective images
which form memory, each being indeed a separate memory, as an aggregate
of bees' cells form a comb, are always ready to come forth, just as
honey is always sweet, limpid, and fluid. There is between them all
an associative faculty, or a strange and singular power, which begins
to act when the will sleeps. Whether it be also an independent Self
which plays capriciously while conscious will sleeps, or a result of
correlated forces, it is not as yet possible to determine. What we know
is, that it calls forth the images by association, and in a fantastic,
capricious manner, imitates and combines what we have experienced,
or read, or thought, during our waking hours.

III. Our waking will can only realize or act on such images as it
has kept familiarly before it, or such as have been so often recalled
that they recur spontaneously. But all the treasures of memory seem
to be available to the dream ruler, and with them a loose facile
power of grouping them into kaleidoscopic combinations. Thus, if one
could imagine a kaleidoscope which at every turn made varied groups
of human or other figures in different attitudes, with changing
scenery; and then suppose this to be turned round by some simple
vital or mechanical action, he would have an idea of the action of
dreams. It is probable that the radical function of the dream-power
is to prevent images from becoming utterly forgotten or rusty; and by
exercising the faculty of facile or chance combination to keep awake
in man originality and creativeness. For it is almost certain that,
but for the intrusion of this faculty into our waking thoughts, man
would become a mere animal, without an idea beyond the joint common
appetites, instincts, and emotions of the lowest of his kind.

IV. The dream-power intrudes more or less into all waking life. Then it
acts, though irregularly, yet in harmony, with conscious will. When it
is powerful and has great skill in forming associations of images--and
by images I mean, with Kay, "ideas"--and can also submit these to
waking wisdom, the result is poetry or art. In recalling strange,
beautiful images, and in imagining scenes, we partly lapse into
dreaming; in fact, we do dream, though conscious will sits by us
all the time and even aids our work. And most poets and artists,
and many inventors, will testify that, while imagining or inventing,
they abstract the "mind" from the world and common-place events,
seek calm and quiet, and try to get into a "brown study," which is a
waking dream. That is to say, a condition which is in some respects
analogous to sleep is necessary to stimulate the flow and combination
of images. This brown study is a state of mind in which images flow
and blend and form new shapes far more easily than when Will and Reason
have the upper hand. For they act only in a conventional beaten track,
and deal only with the known and familiar.

V. Magic is the production of that which is not measured by the
capacity of the conscious working will. The dream spirit, or that
which knows all our memories, and which combines, blends, separates,
scatters, unites, confuses, intensifies, beautifies, or makes terrible
all the persons, scenes, acts, events, tragedies, or comedies known
to us, can, if it pleases, by instantaneous reasoning or intuition,
perceive what waking common sense does not. We visit a sick man, and
the dream spirit, out of the inexhaustible hoards of memory aided by
association, which results in subtle, occult reasoning, perceives that
the patient will die in a certain time, and this result is served up
in a dramatic dream. The amount of miracles, mysteries, apparitions,
omens, and theurgia which the action of these latent faculties cause,
or seem to cause, is simply illimitable, for no man knows how much he
knows. Few, indeed, are the ordinary well-educated Europeans of average
experience of life, whose memories are not inexhaustible encyclopædias,
and whose intellects are not infinite; if all that is really in them
could be wakened from slumber, "know thyself" would mean "know the
universe." Now, there are people who, without being able to say why,
are often inspired by this power which intuitively divines or guesses
without revealing the process to common sense. They look into the
eye of a person--something in glances and tones, gestures, mien, and
address, suggests at once an assertion or a prediction which proves to
be true. Considering that the dream-power has millions of experiences
or images at its command, that it flits over them all like lightning,
that it can combine, abstract, compare, and deduct, that it being,
so to speak, more of a thaumaturgical artist than anything else,
excels waking wisdom in subtle trickery, the wonder is, not that we
so often hear of marvellous, magical, inexplicable wonders, but that
they are not of daily or hourly occurrence. When we think of what we
might be if we could master ourselves, and call on the vast sea of
knowledge which is in the brain of every one who reads these lines,
to give strict reckoning of its every wave and every drop of water,
and every shell, pebble, wreck, weed, or grain of sand over which it
rolls, and withal master the forces which make its tides and storms,
then we may comprehend that all the wonder-working power attributed
to all the sorcerers of olden time was nothing compared to what we
really have within us.

It is awful, it is mysterious, it is terrible to learn this tremendous
truth that we are indeed within ourselves magicians gifted with
infinite intellectual power--which means the ability to know and do
all things. In the past men surmised the existence of this infinite
memory, this power of subtle research and combination, but between
them and the truth in every land and time interposed the idea of
objective spiritual or supernatural existences whose aid or medium
was necessary to attain to wisdom. Outside of us was always Somebody
Else to be invoked, conciliated, met in vision or trance, united to
in spiritual unity or syncope. Sometimes they hit upon some form of
hypnotism or mesmerism, opiates or forced swoons and convulsions,
and so extorted from the nerves and dream-power some of their secrets
which were all duly attributed to the "spirits." But in the whole
range of occult literature from Hermes Trismegistus down to Madame
Blavatsky there is not a shade of a suspicion that all the absolutely
authentic marvels of magic began and ended with man himself.

Least of all did any speculator yet conjecture how to set forth
on the path which leads us to this wonderland. For there is a way
to it, and a power to master the infinite stores of memory and
render the dream-power a willing servant, if we take the pains to
do it. Firstly--as may be found asserted, and I think fairly proved,
in my work on "Practical Education," and in the "Memory of David Kay"
(London, 1888)--every child by a very easy gradual process, simply that
of learning by heart, and reviewing, can develope its memory to such a
degree that all which that child reads, hears, or sees can be literally
retained for life. Secondly, quickness of perception, which is allied
to memory, can be taught so as to develope intuitive observation
and intelligence to an equally incredible extent. Thirdly--and for
this I have had abundant personal experience--every child can learn
Design and the Minor Arts or develope the Constructive faculties,
and by doing this alone a pupil becomes exceptionally clever in all
studies. The proof of this is that the 200 pupils who attended an
industrial or art school in Philadelphia took precedence in studies
among 110,000 others in the public schools.

If all the stores of our memory were distinctly cognized by our waking
will when they first came into our possession, we should have the first
great element of power beyond all our present dreams of greatness. That
this can be done has been recognized by many of the most advanced
thinkers of the day. If a child be trained to exercise quickness of
perception so that at last it observes and remembers everything--and
experiment has proved this also--it will make the Dream Power a
waking power absolutely in harmony and accordance with waking wisdom
or conscious will. For the reason why the capricious, wild, strange
fitful faculty has always remained foreign to us, is because in all
our culture we have never sought to subdue and train the powers allied
to it. Catch and tame one water-fairy, says the Red Indian legend,
and you may get all her sisters. Waking quickness of perception is
a wonderful ability. It can be trained to flit like lightning over
illimitable fields of thought (supplied by a vast memory), and with
them it spontaneously developes comparison and deduction. Now all of
this is marvellously akin to the habitual action of the dream power
plus that of reflection. And it is not possible to conceive that with
waking quickness of perception, or voluntary subtlety of thought,
cultivated in infancy to the highest power, its twin which sports in
sleep should not feel its influence and act under it.

The result of this culture would inevitably be that the marvels,
mysteries, and magic as they seem to us of the dream, or intuitive
power, would be perfectly under our waking control, or to such an
extent that we could secure all that is profitable in them. It is a
very curious fact that while Reflection or Waking Wisdom slumbers,
Quickness of Perception or Perception and Association seem to
be always awake--in dreams or waking. A very extended series of
observations has convinced me that the acquisition of a very great
degree of Observation itself, or of Attention, is as possible as to
learn French, and no harder; yet as a branch of study it literally
does not exist. As a writer in the New York Tribune remarks: "In fact,
observation is almost an atrophied faculty, and when a writer practises
it for the purposes of his art, we regard the matter as in some sense
wonderful." Interest, as Maudsley has shown, is a natural result of
Attention, and the two generate Will. Whether we can actually control
the Dream-power is not as yet proved by experiment. All that we can
say is that it is probable. But that this power manifests itself in
waking hours when it submits to Reflection, is an established fact. It
shows itself in all imagination, in all originality, brave art or
"fantasy." Therefore it is no extravagant deduction to conclude that
all of its action which now seems so wonderful, and which has furnished
the ground-work for what we call magic, is perfectly within our grasp,
and may be secured by simple methods of training which require only
perseverance to perfect them.

The gypsy fortune-teller is accustomed for years to look
keenly and earnestly into the eyes of those whom she dukkers or
"fortune-tells." She is accustomed to make ignorant and credulous
or imaginative girls feel that her mysterious insight penetrates
"with a power and with a sign" to their very souls. As she looks into
their palms, and still more keenly into their eyes, while conversing
volubly with perfect self-possession, ere long she observes that she
has made a hit--has chanced upon some true passage or relation to the
girl's life. This emboldens her. Unconsciously the Dream Spirit, or the
Alter-Ego, is awakened. It calls forth from the hidden stores of Memory
strange facts and associations, and with it arises the latent and often
unconscious quickness of Perception, and the gypsy actually apprehends
and utters things which are "wonderful." There is no clairvoyance,
illumination or witchcraft in such cases. If such powers existed
as they are generally understood to do, we should for one case of
curious prediction hear of twenty thousand. But the Dream-power is
at best fitful, irregular and fantastic in its action; it is at all
times untrustworthy, for it has never been trained unless of yore by
Chaldæan priests and magi. In some wonderful way facts do, however,
manifest themselves, evoked out of the unknown by "occult," though
purely material, mental faculties; and the result is that wonder at the
inexplicable--which makes miracles--until we are accustomed to them.

That gypsy women often do surmise or arrive at very curious and
startling truths I know by my own experience, and also know that I
myself when reading character in people's hands according to the laws
laid down in books on chiromancy, when I have felt deeply interested,
or as one may say excited or inspired, and have gone a little beyond
mere description into conjecture and deduction, have been amazed at
my own successes. It happened once that when in company with several
ladies it was proposed after lunch to go to a gypsy camp on the
Thames, and have fortunes told. Among these ladies was one of a very
imaginative temperament, who had not only lived many years in the East,
but had resided several winters as a guest in Arab families. As she
was very much disappointed at not finding the gypsies, I offered to
tell her fortune by onomancy, i.e., by taking the letters of her name
according to numbers, and deducing from them her past and future. This
I did in a most reckless manner, freely setting down whatever came into
my mind. It seems to me now that a kind of inspiration suggested what
I wrote and predicted. What was my amazement to hear the lady declare
that all which had been written as to her past life was literally true,
and I saw that she was simply awed at my supposed power of prediction,
and had the fullest faith in what I had declared as regarded the
future. What I had intended for a jest or mere entertainment turned
out to be serious enough. And reflecting on the evil consequences
of such belief on a person who naturally attributed it all to magic,
I deeply regretted what I had done, and have not since attempted any
renewal of such oracle-work. It had previously occurred that I wrote
out such a prediction for another lady which I did not clearly explain
to her, but in which there was a regular recurrence and repetition
of something unfortunate. This was shown in after years, and the
troubles all came to pass as I had written. Now the more I studied
this case the more I was convinced that it was based on unconscious
observation, comparison, and deduction. Fichte has said that no bird
can fly beyond itself, but the mind sometimes does actually precede
its own conscious reasoning and throw back facts to it.

It may be urged by those who still cling to the old-fashioned fetish
of a distinction between Spirit and Matter, that this explanation of
predictions, oracles, and insight, is simply materialistic and utterly
destructive of all the poetry, grandeur, and beauty which is associated
with mysterious divination. But for those who believe with Maudsley,
et sui generis, that all such distinctions are not seriously worth
considering, and to him who can rise to the great philosophy now
dawning on the world, there is perceptible in it something far more
wonderful and poetical, beautiful and even awful, than ever was known
to any occultist of old--for it is scientific and true. It is also true
that man can now talk across the world and hear all sounds conveyed
to him through the depths of ocean. He can catch these sounds and
keep them for centuries. How long will it be before sights, scents,
and tastes will be thus transferred, and the man sitting in London
will see all things passing in Asia, or wherever it pleases him or an
agent to turn a mirror on a view? It will be. [19] Or how long before
the discovery of cheap and perfect aerial navigation will change all
society and annihilate national distinctions? That, too, will be. These
and a thousand stranger discoveries will during the ensuing century
burst upon the world, changing it utterly. We go on as of old in our
little petty narrow grooves, declaring that this will be, and that will
never come to pass, and that this or that kind of hop-scotch lines,
and tip-cat and marbles rules, are the eternal laws of humanity,
and lo! all the while in his study some man whom you regard as a
dreamer or dolt is preparing that which will be felt forever.

One of these great discoveries, and that not the least, will be the
development and mastery of memory and perception, attention, interest,
and will in children, with the constructive faculty which stimulates
the whole by means of easy gradual series of instructions. When
this system shall be perfected, we shall advance to understanding,
controlling, and disciplining the subtler and stranger powers of the
brain, which now puzzle us as dreams, intuitions, poetic inspiration,
and prophecy. But this prophecy comes not from it, nor from any vague
guessing or hoping. It is based on facts and on years of careful
study of a thousand children's minds, and from a conviction derived
from calm observation, that the powers of the human mind are infinite
and capable of being developed by science. And they will be!

There is very little knowledge among gypsies of real chiromancy, such
as is set forth in the literature of occult or semi-occult science. Two
centuries ago, when chiromancy was studied seriously and thoroughly
by learned and wise men, the latter compared thousands of hands,
and naturally enough evolved certain truths, such as you, reader,
would probably evolve for yourself if you would do the same. Firstly
they observed, as you may do, that the hand of a boor is not marked
like that of a gentleman, nor that of an ignoramus like the palm of
an artist or scholar. The line which indicates brain is on an average
shorter in women than in men; in almost every instance certain signs
infallibly indicate great sensuality, Others show a disposition to
dreaminess, sentimentalism, the occult. Now as Love, Wisdom, Strength
of Will, or Inertness, are associable with Venus, Apollo, Jupiter,
or Saturn, and as astrology was then seriously believed in, it came
to pass that the signs of chiromancy were distributed to the seven
planets, and supposed to be under their dominion. It was an error, but
after all it amounts to a mere classification. Properly considered,
the names Jupiter, Saturn, Apollo, Mercury, Venus, and Mars are only
synonymes of qualities, meaning masculine virtue and character,
aptitude, art, cleverness, sexual passion, and combativeness. He
who would, without a trace of superstition, analyze and describe
many hands compared with the characters of their owners, would adopt
effectively the same arrangement.

When we remember the age in which they lived and the popular yearning
for wonders and marvels which then characterized even the wisest men,
the old chiromancers were singularly free from superstition. There
were many among them who would have regarded with supreme contempt
a Desbarolles, with his fortune-telling for twenty francs.

To these truly honest men, the gypsies, with their pretended
chiromancy, were at first a great puzzle. The learned Prætorius, in
his vast work on Chiromancy and Physiognomy, devotes seventy-five
pages to this "foreign element in our midst," and comes to the
conclusion that they are humbugs. They do not know the lines--they
know nothing. The intrusion of the latent powers of the mind had no
place in the philosophy of Prætorius, therefore he did not perceive
the back door by which the Romany slipped into the oracle. Yet
there is abundant evidence even in his own valuable collection of
the works of his predecessors, that many of them when tempted from
merely describing character to straying into prophecy, were guided by
something more mysterious than the laws of the lines of life, of the
head, heart, the circle of Venus, the "hepatic," and viâ lactea. The
Hungarian gypsies have a system of chiromancy of their own which the
reader may find in the book "Vom Wandernden Zigeunervolke," by Dr. von
Wlislocki, Hamburg, 1890. I had translated this and more of the kind
for this chapter, but omitted it, thinking, firstly, that its place
is supplied by more important matter; and, secondly, because it is,
save as perhaps indicative of Indian origin, quite valueless, being
merely of the prophetic kind.

I have more than once known gypsies to tell me things of my past life
which were certainly remarkable, bewildering, or inexplicable. And for
the ordinary seeker of "voonders oopon voonders" it is all-sufficient
that a thing shall be beyond clear intelligence. "How do you explain
that?" is their crucial question, and their cry of triumph when
relating some case of an authentic apparition, a spiritual feat
of thaumaturgy, or a dream fulfilled. In fact they would rather
not have it explained. I well remember how Professor Joseph Henry,
when lecturing on natural science, narrated to us, his hearers, how
when he told certain people how certain tricks of a common conjuror
were executed, they all protested that it could not be the way it
was done. They did not wish to be disillusioned. Raise a man from
the dead, make him fly through the air, and it is for everybody a
miracle. Give them the power to do the same, and in a month's time
it will be no longer miraculous, but something "in the due course of
nature." And what single fact is there in the due course of nature
which is not as inexplicable if we seek for a full explanation of
it? Consider this thing every day till you are penetrated with it,
bear it in mind constantly, and in due time all phenomena will
be miracles. We can apparently get a little nearer to the causes
and give our discoveries names, but the primal causes as constantly
recede and are continually buried in deeper mystery. But with most
people names pass for explanations.

"Can you tell me what a hypothesis is?" asked a young gentleman at a
dinner party of a friend who passed for being well-informed. "Hush,"
was the reply. "Not now--ladies present."

"Mon caporal," asked a French soldier, "can you tell me what is
meant by an equilateral?" "Certainly--mais d'abord--do you know
Hebrew?" "No." "Ah, then it would be impossible to explain it to you."

"What is it that makes people's heads ache?" inquired an old lady
of a youth who had just begun his medical studies. "Oh, it is only
the convolution of the anomalies of the ellipsoid," replied the
student. "Just see now what it is to git larnin!" commented the
dame. "He knows it all in a straight line?"

The one is satisfied that a hypothesis is something improper, the
other that an equilateral is a matter which he might understand if
he were as learned as his corporal, and the third is pleased to find
that the mystery has at least a name. And human beings are satisfied
in the same way as to the mysteries of Nature. Give them a name and
assure them that the learned understand it, and they are satisfied.

It is a fundamental principle of human folly to assume that any
alleged marvel is a "violation of the laws of Nature," or the work of
supernatural influences, until it is proved not to be such. Nature
cannot be violated. She is ever virgin. And "how do you account for
that?" is always assumed to be a test question. It cannot be denied
that in almost every case, the narrator assumes the absolute truth
of all which he states, when, as is well known, even in the most
commonplace incidents of ordinary life, such truth can very rarely be
obtained. Secondly, he assumes that all the persons who were cognizant
of the miracle, or were concerned in it, were not only perfectly
truthful, but endowed with perfect perfections, and absolutely sound
judgments. If there is the least shadow of a possibility that one
of them could have erred in the least particular, the whole must
fall to the ground as a proof or test--for we must have irrefragible
and complete evidence before we adopt a faith on which all our life
may depend. But, thirdly, by asking any one to account for a marvel,
he assumes that the one thus called on knows everything short of the
supernatural or Infinite, which is simply silly.

But there is a higher source of admiration and wonder than could
ever be established by vulgar fetish, Animism, or supernaturalism,
and this is to be found in the mysteries of Nature which man has never
penetrated, and which, as soon as they are overcome, reveal others far
grander or deeper. Thus as Alps rise beyond Alps, and seas of stars
and solar systems spread in proportions of compound multiplication,
our powers of vision increase. And it often happens to him who looks
deeply into causes, that one of the myriad test cases of so-called
"supernaturalism," when it has ignominiously broken down--as all do
sooner or later--often reveals a deeper marvel or mystery than it
was intended to support. Thus some Red Indians in North America,
on being told how certain juggling tricks which they had accepted
for magic were performed, calmly replied that it did not make the
least difference--that a man must have been a magician (or divinely
inspired) to be able to find out such tricks. And I myself knew an
Indian trader named Ross, who, being once among a wild tribe, put on
a mask of papier maché, which caused tremendous excitement and awe,
which was not in the least diminished when he took it off and put it
into their hands and explained its nature, for they maintained that
the thing which could cause such terror indicated the existence of
superior mental power, or magic, in the maker. In which there is,
as it seems to me, indications of a much higher wisdom or sagacity
than is to be found in the vulgar spiritualist who takes the event or
thing itself for the miracle, and who, when found out in his tricks,
ignominiously collapses.

The conclusion from all this is, that I have seen and heard of much
in gypsy witchcraft and fortune-telling which, while it was directly
allied to humbug of the shallowest kind, also rested on, or was
inspired by, mental action or power which, in our present state of
knowledge, must be regarded as strangely mysterious and of the deepest
interest. And this is indeed weird, in the fullest and truest sense,
since it is used for prophecy. I will now endeavour to illustrate this.

It is but natural that there should be "something in" gypsy
fortune-telling. If the reader were to tell ten fortunes a day for
twenty years it would be very remarkable indeed if in that time he had
not learned some things which would seem wonderful to the world. He
would detect at a glance the credulous, timid, bold, doubtful, refined
or vulgar nature, just as a lawyer learns to detect character by
cross-examination. Many experiments of late years have gone very far
to establish the existence of a power of divining or reading thought;
how this is really done I know not; perhaps the experts in it are as
ignorant as I am, but it is very certain that certain minds, in some
(as yet) marvellous way, betray their secrets to the master. That
there are really gypsies who have a very highly cultivated faculty of
reading the mind by the eye is certainly true. Sometimes they seem to
be themselves uncertain, and see as through a glass darkly, and will
reveal remarkable facts doubtfully. I remember a curious illustration
of this. Once I was walking near Bath, and meeting a tinker asked him
if there were any gypsies in the vicinity. He gave me the address
of a woman who lived in a cottage at no great distance. I found it
with some trouble, and was astonished on entering at the abominably
miserable, reckless, squalid appearance of everything. There was a
half or quarter-bred gypsy woman, ragged, dirty, and drunk, a swarm
of miserable children, and a few articles of furniture misplaced
or upset as if the inmates had really no idea of how a room should
be lived in. I addressed the woman civilly, but she was too vulgar
and degraded to be capable of sensible or civil conversation with
a superior. Such people actually exist among the worst class of
vagabonds. But as I, disgusted, was about to leave, and gave her a
small gratuity, she offered to tell my fortune, which I declined,
whereupon she cried, "You shall see that I know something;" and
certainly told me something which astonished me, of an event which
had taken place two years before at a great distance. To test her I
coolly denied it all, at which she seemed astonished and bewildered,
saying, "Can I have made a mistake? You are certainly the person." All
of this may be explained by causes which I shall set forth. But it
cannot be too earnestly insisted on to people who habitually doubt,
that because a thing can be explained in a certain way (i.e., by
humbug) that it necessarily follows that that is the only explanation
of it. Yet this is at the present day actually and positively the
popular method, and it obtains very largely indeed with the small
critics of the "safe school." Mrs. Million has diamonds; she may have
stolen them--a great many people have stolen diamonds--therefore she
is probably a thief. The Icelandic sagas describe journies to America;
but the writers of the sagas were often mythical, exaggerative, and
inaccurate--therefore all they narrate as regards America must be,
of course, untrue.


    Jack Stripe
    Eats tripe,
    It is therefore credible
    That tripe is edible;
    And it follows perforce,
    As a matter of course,
    That the devil will gripe
    All who do not eat tripe.


But I do not insist that there is anything "miraculous" in gypsy
fortune-telling. It may be merely the result of great practical
experience and of a developed intuition, it may be mind or
"thought-reading"--whatever that really is--or it may result from
following certain regular rules. This latter method will be pronounced
pure humbug, but of that I will speak anon. These rules followed by
anybody, even the feeblest dilettante who has only read Desbarolles
for drawing-room entertainment, will often astonish the dupe. They are,
"in few," as follows:--


    1. It is safe in most cases with middle-aged men to declare that
    they have had a law-suit, or a great dispute as to property, which
    has given them a great deal of trouble. This must be impressively
    uttered. Emphasis and sinking the voice are of great assistance
    in fortune-telling. If the subject betray the least emotion,
    or admit it, promptly improve the occasion, express sympathy,
    and "work it up."

    2. Declare that a great fortune, or something greatly to the
    advantage of the subject, or something which will gratify him,
    will soon come in his way, but that he must be keen to watch his
    opportunity and be bold and energetic.

    3. He will have three great chances, or fortunes, in his life. If
    you know that he has inherited or made a fortune, or had a good
    appointment, you may say that he has already realized one of
    them. This seldom fails.

    4. A lady of great wealth and beauty, who is of singularly
    sympathetic disposition, is in love with him, or ready to be,
    and it will depend on himself to secure his happiness. Or he will
    soon meet such a person when he shall least expect it.

    5. "You had at one time great trouble with your relations (or
    friends). They treated you very unkindly." Or, "They were prepared
    to do so, but your resolute conduct daunted them."

    6. "You have been three times in great danger of death." Pronounce
    this very impressively. Everybody, though it be a schoolboy
    believes, or likes to believe, that he has encountered perils. This
    is infallible, or at least it takes in most people. If the subject
    can be induced to relate his hairbreadth escapes, you may foretell
    future perils.

    7. "You have had an enemy who has caused you great trouble. But
    he--or she--it is well not to specify which till you find out the
    sex--will ere long go too far, and his or her effort to injure you
    will recoil on him or her." Or, briefly, "It is written that some
    one, by trying to wrong you, will incur terrible retribution." Or,
    "You have had enemies, but they are all destined to come to
    grief." Or, "You had an enemy but you outlived him."

    8. "You got yourself once into great trouble by doing a good act."

    9. "Your passions have thrice got you into great trouble. Once
    your inconsiderate anger (or pursuit of pleasure) involved you in
    great suffering which, in the end, was to your advantage." Or else,
    "This will come to pass; therefore be on your guard."

    10. "You will soon meet with a person who will have a great
    influence on your future life if you cultivate his friendship. You
    will ere long meet some one who will fall in love with you,
    if encouraged."

    11. "You will find something very valuable if you keep your eyes
    open and watch closely. You have twice passed over a treasure
    and missed it, but you will have a third opportunity."

    12. "You have done a great deal of good, or made the fortune or
    prosperity of persons who have been very ungrateful."

    13. "You have been involved in several love affairs, but your
    conduct in all was really perfectly blameless."

    14. "You have great capacity for something, and before long
    an occasion will present itself for you to exert it to your
    advantage."


By putting these points adroitly, and varying or combining them,
startling cases of conviction may be made. Yet even into this deception
will glide intuition, or the inexplicable insight to character,
and the deceiver himself be led to marvel, so true is it that he who
flies from Brama goes towards him, let him do what he will, for Truth
is everywhere, and even lies lead to it.

The reader has often seen in London Italian women who have small birds,
generally parrakeets, or paraquitos, which will for a penny pick out
for her or for him slips of paper on which is printed a "fortune." If
he will invest his pence in these he will in most instances find
that they "fit his case" exactly, because they are framed on these
or other rules, which are of very general application. There was,
in 1882, an Italian named Toricelli. Whether he was a descendant of
the great natural philosopher of the same name who discovered the law
of the vacuum I do not know, but he certainly exhibited--generally
in Piccadilly--an ingenious application of it. He had a long glass
cylinder, filled with water, in which there was a blown glass image
of an imp. By pressing his hand on the top of the cover of the tube
the folletto or diavoletto was made to rise or fall--from which the
prediction was drawn. It will hardly be believed, but the unfortunate
Toricelli was actually arrested by the police and punished for
"fortune-telling." [20] After this he took to trained canaries or
parrakeets, which picked out printed fortunes, for a living. Whether
the stern arm of British justice descended on him for this latter
form of sorcery and crime I do not know.


   "Forse fu dal demonio trasportato,
    Fiancheggiandosi del' autorita
    Di Origene o di San Girolamo."


Now it may be admitted that to form such rules (and there are many
more far more ingenious and generally applicable) and to put them into
practice with tact, adapting them to intuitions of character, not only
as seen in the face but as heard in the voice or betrayed by gestures
and dress and manner, must in the end develop a power. And, further
still, this power by frequent practice enables its possessor to perform
feats which are really marvellous and perhaps inexplicable, as yet,
to men of science. I have, I think, indicated the road by which they
travel to produce this result, but to what they arrived I do not know.

Nor do they all get there. What genius is, physiology, with all the
vast flood of light spread by Francis Galton on hereditary gifts,
cannot as yet explain. It is an absolute thing of itself, and a
"miracle." Sometimes this wonderful power of prediction and of reading
thought and quickly finding and applying rules falls into the hands
of a genius. Then all our explanations of "humbug" and "trickery"
and juggling fall to the ground, because he or she works what are
absolutely as much miracles as if the artist had raised the dead. Such
geniuses are the prophets of old; sometimes they are poets. There
are as many clearly-defined and admirable predictions as to events
in art and politics in the works of Heine, which were fulfilled,
as can be found anywhere.

By the constant application of such rules, promptly and aptly,
or boldly, the fortune-teller acquires a very singular quickness of
perception. There are very few persons living who really know what this
means and to what apparently marvellous results constant practice in it
may lead. Beginning with very simple and merely mechanical exercises
("Practical Education," p. 151. London: Whittaker & Co.), perception
may be gradually developed until not only the eye and ear observe
a thousand things which escape ordinary observation, and also many
"images" at once, but finally the mind notes innumerable traits of
character which would have once escaped it, combines these, and in a
second draws conclusions which would amuse those who are ignorant--as
indeed all men are as yet--of the extraordinary faculties latent in
every man.

I beg the reader to pay special attention to this fact. There is
nothing in all the annals of prophecy, divination, fortune-telling, or
prediction, which is nearly so wonderful as what we may all do if we
would by practice and exercise bring out of ourselves our own innate
power of perception. This is not an assertion based on metaphysical
theory; it is founded on fact, and is in strict accordance with the
soundest conclusions of modern physiology. By means of it, joined
to exercises in memorizing, all that there is in a child of ordinary
intellect may be unerringly drawn out; and when in due time knowledge
or information is gradually adduced, there is perhaps no limit to
what that intellect may become. The study, therefore, of quickness
of perception, as set forth or exercised in gypsy fortune-telling,
is indeed curious; but to the far-reaching observer who is interested
in education it is infinitely more useful, for it furnishes proof of
the ability latent in every mind to perform what appear to be more than
feats of intelligence or miracles, yet which often are all mere trifles
compared to what man could effect if he were properly trained to it.

Sorcery! We are all sorcerers, and live in a wonderland of marvel
and beauty if we did but know it. For the seed sprouting from the
ground is as strange a truth as though we saw the hosts of heaven
sweeping onward in glory, or could commune with fairies, or raise
from his grave the master magician of song who laid a curse on all
who should dig his dust. But like children who go to sleep in the
grand opera, and are wild with delight at Punch, we turn aside from
the endless miracle of nature to be charmed and bewildered with the
petty thaumaturgy of guitars in the dark, cigarettes, and rope-tying,
because it corresponds to and is miracle enough for us. And perhaps it
is as well; for much thought on the Infinites made Jean Paul Richter
and Thomas Carlyle half mad and almost unfit for common life. Seek
truth in Science and we shall be well balanced in the little as well
as the great.








CHAPTER XII.

FORTUNE-TELLING (continued).--ROMANCE BASED ON CHANCE, OR HOPE, AS
REGARDS THE FUTURE--FOLK- AND SORCERY-LORE--AUTHENTIC INSTANCES OF
GYPSY PREDICTION.


It would seem to all who now live that life would be really
intolerably dry were it utterly deprived of mystery, marvel, or
romance. This latter is the sentiment of hopeful chance allied to
the beautiful. Youth is willing or eager to run great risks if the
road to or through them passes by dark ravines, under castled rocks--


          "o'er dewy grass
    And waters wild and fleet"


--and ever has been from the beginning. Now, it is a matter of serious
importance to know whether this romance is so deeply inherent in
man that it can never be removed. For, rightly viewed, it means
current religion, poetry, and almost all art--as art at least was
once understood--and it would seem as if we had come, or are coming,
to a time when science threatens to deprive us of it all. Such is
the hidden fear of many a priest and poet--it may be worth while to
consider whether it is all to pass away into earnest prose or assume
new conditions. Has the world been hitherto a child, or a youth,
were poetry and supernaturalism its toys, and has the time come when
it is to put away childish things?

We can only argue from what we are, and what we clearly know or
understand. And we know that there are in Nature, though measured
by the senses alone, phenomena which awake delightful or terrible,
sublime or beautiful, grave or gay feelings, or emotions, which inspire
corresponding thoughts. There is for us "an elf-home glory-land,"
far over setting suns, mysterious beauty in night and stars in
their eternal course, grandeur of God in the ocean, loveliness in
woman, chiaroscuro in vapoury valleys and the spray of waterfalls
by moonlight, exciting emotions which are certainly not within the
domain of science--as yet--and which it is impossible for us, as we
are at present constituted, to imagine as regarded entirely from the
standpoint of chemical and physical analysis. To see in all this--as we
are--only hydro-carbons, oxygen, silex and aluminium, atoms, molecules,
and "laws"--that is to say, always the parts and combinations and no
sense as regards man that he is, with his emotional sense of beauty,
anywhere in the game or of any account--is going far too far. Setting
teleology and theology entirely aside, Man, as the highest organism,
has a right to claim that, as the highest faculties which have been
as yet developed in him were caused by natural phenomena, therefore
there is in the phenomena a certain beauty which is far more likely
to lead to more advanced enjoyment of form, colour, or what we call
the æsthetic sense, than to shrink away and disappear. And it seems
to me that the most extended consideration of science leads to the
result or conclusion that under its influence we shall find that the
chemical and physical analyses of which I have spoken are only the
dry A B C of a marvellously grand literature, or of a Romance and
Poetry and Beauty--perhaps even of a wondrous "occult" philosophy,
of whose beginning even we have, as yet, no idea.

But, great as it may be, those who will make it must derive their
summary of facts or bases of observation from the past, and therefore
I urge the importance of every man who can write doing what he can
to collect all that illustrates Humanity as it is and as it was in
by-gone ages. It hath not entered into the heart of man to conceive
what a Folk-lore or ethnological society in ancient Greece, Rome,
or Egypt might not have collected and preserved for the delight of
every civilized human being of the present day. It is very true
that the number of persons, as yet, who understand this--still
less of those who take a real interest in it--is extremely limited,
and they do not extend in England, America, or any other country, to
more than a few hundreds. To the vast multitude, even of learned men,
Folk-lore is only a "craze" for small literary bric-à-brac, a "fancy"
which will have its run, and nothing more. To its earnest devotees
it is the last great development of the art of learning and writing
history, and a timely provision for future social science. It sets
forth the most intimate inner life of people as they were, and the
origins of our life as it is. In Folk-lore, Philology, Ethnology,
and the study of Mythology or Religion find their greatest aid.

The amount of Red Indian Folk-lore which has been suffered to perish
in the United States without exciting the least interest is beyond
all belief. Thoreau could find in the Algonkin legends of New
England nothing but matter for feeble-minded ridicule. But there
are men coming, or a generation rising, to whom every record of
the past will be of value, for they are beginning to perceive that
while the collector is doing work of value the mere theorist, who
generally undervalues if he does not actually oppose the collector,
will with his rubbish be swept away "down the back-entry of time,"
to be utterly forgotten.

Gypsy sorcery-lore is of great value because all over the Aryan
world gypsies have in ancient or modern times been, so to speak, the
wandering priests of that form of popular religion which consists
of a faith in fortune-telling. This is really a very important
part in every cult; the most remarkable thing connected with it;
as with charms, fetishes, incantations and protective spells,
being the extraordinary success with which the more respectable
magi have succeeded in convincing their followers that their own
sorcery was not "magic" at all, and that the world-old heathen rites,
which are substantially the same, are mere modern thieveries from the
"established religion." Prediction and prophecy were the cornerstones
of the classic mythology and of the Jewish law; they were equally
dear to the Celtic races, and all men seem from the earliest times to
have believed that coming events cast their shadows before. How this
began and grew requires no deep study. Many disorders are prefaced
by uneasy dreams or unaccountable melancholy, even as the greatest
disaster which befel the gods of Valhalla was preceded by the troubled
dreams of Balder. Sometimes the first symptom of gout is a previous
irritability. But if diseases are believed to be caused by the literal
occupation of the body by evil spirits these presages will be ascribed
to occult spiritual influences. A man in excellent health feels gay--he
goes hunting and has luck--of course his guardian spirit is believed to
have inspired him to go. Then comes the priest or the gypsy to predict,
and the hits are recorded and the misses are promptly forgotten.

The following instance has been related to me in good faith by a
learned friend, whose books are well known to all Folk-lorists:--


   "I can quote from my own experience a strange event founded on
    a prediction made to me by a gypsy in 1863. This was before I
    had learned the language of the Romany or had begun to take any
    interest in them. At the time of which I speak, I met one day here,
    in T----, one or two gypsy women bearing as usual babies on their
    shoulders, when the oldest as I was passing by pointed me out to
    the bystanders, saying in German, 'Der Herr hat viel Kummer gehabt'
    ('That gentleman has had much trouble'--or sorrow).

   "This was true enough, as I was suffering greatly at the time
    from a previous bereavement, though I was no longer in mourning,
    nor was there at the instant any indication of gloom in my looks,
    for I was in a cheerful humour. So I stopped to ask her why she had
    made her remark. She replied, 'Ja, geben Sie mir die linke Hand und
    legen Sie drei Silbermünze darauf, wenn Sie weiteres hören wollen'
    ('Yes, give me your hand, and put three silver coins on it, if
    you would hear more'). I did so, when she repeated her assertion
    as to my sorrow, and added, 'Aber eine Gräfinn steht für Ihnen'
    ('But there is a countess awaiting you').

   "I laughed at myself for listening to this, and for the strange
    feeling of interest or faith which I felt in it, and which my
    common sense told me was ridiculous. And yet the prediction,
    strangely enough, was fulfilled, though not in the sense in which I
    suppose most people would have taken it. Soon after I lost another
    relative, and was overwhelmed with that and other troubles when
    Providence sent me a friend in that most amiable and remarkable
    woman the Countess B----, who, with that noble and gracious
    affability which distinguishes her, as well as her husband,
    Sir ----, relieved my mind and cheered my depressed spirits.

   "I add to this a marvellous story of a gypsy prediction which was
    uttered here in T---- and published last year in a small biography,
    but which is worth consideration because I have heard it apparently
    well authenticated by trustworthy people. A very great disgrace to
    our town--I am happy to say he was the only one--was a Mr. M----,
    of very good family. This man kept a mistress named R. M----,
    who became acquainted with a young man who was employed as a
    clerk at the Credit Anstalt, and who always at night carried on
    his person its keys. This M---- learned, and formed the following
    plot: The victim was to be enticed by the woman to her room, where
    she proposed to cut his throat, take the keys, and with the aid of
    M---- to rob the bank and escape. It succeeded so far as that the
    young man was brought to her room, but when she began to attempt
    to kill him he struggled, and was overpowering her when M----
    entered the room and shot him dead.

   "The precious pair were subsequently arrested and tried, and
    in the report of the proceedings there appears the following
    curious statement:--

  "'It is a singular thing (cosa piu singolare) that to this woman
    (M----'s mistress, Miss R----), a gypsy woman who pretended to
    palmistry predicted that she would come to a bad end (ch'essa
    finirebbe assai male).' Which she effectually did, being condemned
    to fourteen years' hard labour, and would have been hung had not
    her "interesting state" inclined the judge to mercy.

   "There is the following addition in the pamphlet to what has
    been quoted: 'Being begged by the said Maria R---- to look more
    closely into the hand, the Zingara refused to do so, and went away
    muttering strange or foreign words.' (Borbottanda strane parole)."


To this my informant adds:--


   "I know of a more cheerful case of gypsy prediction, and of quite
    another kind, and which happened to a friend's friend of mine,
    also here in T----. The 'subject' was a young lady, who was
    'intended' or betrothed, to an Italian actor, who had gone to
    play at Madrid; but for two months she heard nothing from him,
    and, believing that he had neglected her, was in despair.

   "One morning she was passing through one of the main streets,
    and was talking with my friend, when a dark gypsy girl going by,
    whispered to her in a hurried manner: 'Domani avrai una lettera
    e sarai felice' ('To-morrow you will receive a letter and be
    happy'). Having said this and nothing more, without asking for
    money, she went away. The promised letter was in fact received,
    all went well, and the lady is now married to the gentleman. This
    is all simply true. I leave the comments on the case to
    investigators. Can it be that gypsies are sometimes clairvoyant?"


My own comment on the case is that, admitting that the gypsy knew
beforehand all the circumstances or even the "parties" in the affair,
she had divined or "intuited" a result, and risked, as some might call
it, or else uttered from a real conviction, her prophecy. How the mind,
without any miracle--as miracles are commonly regarded--often arrives
quite unconsciously to such conclusions, I have already considered in
another chapter. Making every allowance for unconscious exaggeration
and the accretive power of transmission, I am willing to believe that
the story is actually true.

The following is also perfectly authentic: An English lady of excellent
family, meeting a gypsy, was told by the latter that in six months the
most important event of her life would come to pass. At the end of the
time she died. On her death-bed she said, "I thought the gypsy meant
a marriage, but I feel that something far more important is coming,
for death is the great end of life."

The following was told me by a Hungarian gentleman of Szegedin:--


   "There was in Arad a lady who went to a ball. She had a necklace
    to which were attached four rings. During the evening she took
    this from her neck, and doubling it, wore it on her arm as a
    bracelet. In the house where she lived was a young gentleman
    who came to accompany her home from the ball. All at once, late
    at night, she missed her necklace and the rings, which were of
    great value.

   "The next day she sent for a gypsy woman, who, being consulted,
    declared that the collar had been stolen by some one who was very
    intimate in her house. Her suspicions rested on the young man
    who had accompanied her home. He was arrested, but discharged
    for want of evidence.

   "Three months after there came a kellner, a waiter, from some
    other city, to Arad. The lady, being in a café or some such place
    of resort, was waited on by this man, and saw one of her rings
    on his hand. He was arrested, and before the police declared
    that he held the ring in pledge, having advanced money upon it
    to a certain gentleman. This gentleman was the lady's betrothed,
    and he had stolen her necklace and rings. The gypsy had truly
    enough said that the articles had been taken by some one who was
    intimate in her house."


The gentleman who told me this story also said that the death of his
father had been foretold by a gypsy--that is, by a lady who was of
half-gypsy blood.

It should be borne in mind, though few realize its truth, that in
stages of society where people believe earnestly in anything--for
example, in witchcraft or the evil eye--there results in time a state
of mind or body in which they are actually capable of being killed
with a curse, or a fear of seeing what is not before them in the body,
and of many nervous conditions which are absolutely impossible and
incomprehensible to the world of culture at the present day. But there
are still places where witchcraft may be said to exist literally,
for there the professors of the art to all intents work miracles,
because they are believed in. There is abundance of such faith
extant, even in England. I have heard the names of three "white"
witch doctors in as many towns in the West of England, who are paid
a guinea a visit, their specialty being to "unlock," or neutralize,
or defeat the evil efforts of black witches. This, as is indeed true,
indicates that a rather high class of patients put faith in them. In
Hungary, in the country, the majority, even of the better class, are
very much influenced by gypsy-witches. Witness the following, which is
interesting simply because, while there is very little indeed in it,
it was related to me as a most conclusive proof of magic power:--


   "In a suburb of Szegedin, inhabited only by peasants, there is
    a school with a farm attached to it. The pay of the teacher is
    trifling, but he can make a comfortable living from the land. This
    was held by an old man, who had a young assistant. The old man
    died; the youth succeeded him, and as he found himself doing
    well, in due time he took a wife. They lived happily together
    for a year and had a daughter. In the spring the teacher had to
    work very hard, not only in school but on his farm, and so for
    the first time contracted the habit of going to the tavern to
    refresh himself, and what was worst, of concealing it from his
    wife under plausible tales, to which she gave no trust. She began
    to be very unhappy, and, naturally enough, suspected a rival.

   "Of course she took advice from a gypsy woman, who heard all the
    story and consulted her cards. 'There is,' she said, 'no woman
    whatever in the way. There is no sign of one for good or evil, na
    latchi na misec, in the cards. But beware! for there is a great
    and unexpected misfortune coming, and more than this I cannot
    see.' So she took her pay and departed. Suddenly her child fell
    ill and died after eight days. Then the husband reformed his ways,
    and all went well with them. So, you see, the gypsy foretold it
    all, wonderfully and accurately."


It requires no sorcery to conjecture that the gypsy already knew
the habits of the schoolmaster, as the Romany is generally familiar
with the tavern of every town. To predict a misfortune at large is
a sure card for every prophetess. What is remarkable is that a man
of the world and one widely travelled, as was my informant, attached
great importance to the story. It is evident that where so much of
the sherris sack of faith accompanies such a small crust of miracle
there must be a state of society in which miracles in their real
sense are perfectly capable of being worked.








CHAPTER XIII.

PROVERBS REFERRING TO WITCHES, GYPSIES, AND FAIRIES.


                               "Of Fairies, Witches, Gypsies,
                                My nourrice sang to me,
                                Sua Gypsies, Fairies, Witches,
                                I alsua synge to thee."

                                                       ("Denham Tract.")


Dr. Krauss has in his work, "Sreca, Gluck und Schicksal im Volksglauben
der Südslaven," collected a number of sayings in reference to his
subject, from which I have taken some, and added more from other
sources.

Of an evil woman one says, as in all languages, "To je vila"--that is,
"a witch"; or it is uttered or muttered as, "To je vila ljutica"--that
is, "a biting (or bitter) witch"; or to a woman whom one dislikes,
"Idi vilo!"--"Begone, witch!" as in gypsy, "Jasa tu chovihani!"

Also, as in German, "Ako i je baba, nije vjestica"--"Though she is
an old woman she is no witch"; while, on the other hand, we have,
"Svake baba viestica, a djed vjestac"--"Every old woman is a witch,
and every old man a wizard."

The proverb, "Bizi ko vistica od biloga luka"--"she runs from it
like a witch from white garlic"--will be found fully explained in
the chapter on "The Cure of Children," in which it is shown that from
early times garlic has been a well-known witch-antidote.

Another saying is, "Uzkostrsila se ko vistica"--"Her hair is as
tangled, or twisted, as that of a witch"; English gypsy, "Lakis balia
shan risserdi sar i chovihanis." But this has a slightly different
meaning, since in the Slavonian it refers to matted, wild-looking
locks, while the Romany is according to a belief that the hair of a
witch is curled at the ends only.

Allied to this is the proverb, "Izgleda kao aa su ga coprnice doniele
sa Ivanjscica"--"He looks as if the witches had done for him (or
brought him away, 'fetched' him) on Saint John's Eve"; English Romany,
"Yuv dikela sá soved a lay sar a chovihani"--"He looks as if he had
lain with a witch."

"Svaka vracara s vrazje strane"--"Every witch belongs to the
devil's gang"--that is, she has, sold her soul to him and is in his
interests. This is allied to the saying, "Kud ce vjestica do u svoj
rod?"--"Where should a witch go if not to her kin?" or, "Birds of a
feather flock together."

"Jasa ga vjestice"--"The witches ride him"--refers to the ancient
and world-wide belief that witches turn men into animals and ride
them in sleep.

The hazel tree and nut are allied to the supernatural or witchly in
many lands. For the divining rod, which is, according to "La Grande
Bacchetta Divinatoria O Verga rivelatrice" of the Abbate Valmont,
the great instrument for all magic and marvels, must be made of "un
ramo forcuto di nocciuòlo"--"a forked branch of hazel-nut"--whence a
proverb, "Vracarice, coprnjice, kuko ljeskova!"--"Sorceress, witch,
hazel-stick." This is a reproach or taunt to a woman who pays great
attention to magic and witchcraft. "This reveals a very ancient
belief of the witch as a wood-spirit or fairy who dwells in the nut
itself." More generally it is the bush which, in old German ballads,
is often addressed as Lady Hazel. In this, as in Lady Nightingale,
we have a relic of addressing certain animals or plants as if they
were intelligences or spirits. In one very old song in "Des Knaben
Wunderhorn," a girl, angry at the hazel, who has reproached her for
having loved too lightly or been too frail, says that her brother
will come and cut the bush down. To which Lady Hazel replies:--


   "Although he comes and cuts me down,
      I'll grow next spring, 'tis plain,
    But if a virgin wreath should fade,
      'Twill never bloom again."


To keep children from picking unripe hazel-nuts in the Canton of Saint
Gall they cry to them, "S' Haselnussfràuli chumt"--"The hazel-nut lady
is coming!" Hence a rosary of hazel-nuts or a hazel rod brings luck,
and they may be safely hung up in a house. The hazel-nut necklaces
found in prehistoric tombs were probably amulets as well as ornaments.

Among popular sayings we may include the following from the Gorski
Vijenac:--


   "A eto si udrijo vladiko,
    U nekakve smucene vjetrove,
    Ko u marcu sto udre vjestice."

   "But behold, O Vladika,
    Thou hast thrown thyself into every storm,
    As witches throw or change themselves to cattle."


And with these we may include the curse, "Izjele te viestice"--"May
the witches eat you!" which has its exact parallel in Romany. Also
the Scottish saying, "Witches, warlocks, and gypsies soon ken ae
the ither":--


   "Witches and warlocks without any bother,
    Like gypsies on meeting well know one another."


I may appropriately add to these certain proverbs which are given in
an extremely rare "Denham Tract," of which only fifty copies were
printed by John Bell Richmond, "in. Com. Ebor." This quaint little
work of only six pages is entitled, "A Few Popular Rhymes, Proverbs,
and Sayings relating to Fairies, Witches, and Gypsies," and bears the
dedication, "To every individual Fairy, Witch, and Gypsy from the day
of the Witch of Endor down to that of Billy Dawson, the Wise Man of
Stokesley, lately defunct, this tract is inscribed."




WITCHES.


    Vervain and Dill
    Hinder witches from their will.


The following refers to rowan or mountain-ash wood, which is supposed
to be a charm against witchcraft:--


    If your whipstick's made of rowan
    You can ride your nag thro' any town.

        Much about a pitch,
        Quoth the devil to the witch.

        A hairy man's a geary man,
        But a hairy wife's a witch.

        Woe to the lad
        Without a rowan-tree god.

    A witch-wife and an evil
    Is three-halfpence worse than the devil.

        Hey-how for Hallow-e'en!
        When all the witches are to be seen,
        Some in black and some in green,
        Hey-how for Hallow-e'en!
        Thout! tout! a tout, tout!
        Throughout and about.

    Cummer goe ye before, cummer goe ye,
    Gif ye will not goe before, cummer let me!


"These lines are said to have been sung by witches at North Berwick
in Lothian, accompanied by the music of a Jew's harp or trump, which
was played by Geilles Duncan, a servant girl, before two hundred
witches, who joined hands in a short daunce or reel, singing (also)
these lines with one voice:--


  "'Witchy, witchy, I defy thee,
    Four fingers round my thumb,
    Let me go quietly by thee.'


"It will be seen that this is a phallic sign, and as such dreaded by
witches. It is difficult to understand why these verses with the sign
should have been given by witches."



"The anti-witch rhyme used in Tweedesdale some sixty or seventy years
ago was:--


  "'Black-luggie, lammer bead,
    Rowan-tree and reed thread,
    Put the witches to their speed.'


"The meaning of 'black-luggie' I know not. 'Lammer bead' is a
corruption of 'amber-bead.' They are still worn by a few old people in
Scotland as a preservative against a variety of diseases, especially
asthma, dropsy, and toothache. They also preserve the wearer from
the effects of witchcraft, as stated in the text. I have seen a twig
of rowan-tree, witch-wood, quick-bane, wild ash, wicken-tree, wicky,
wiggy, witchen, witch-bane, royne-tree, mountain-ash, whitty, wiggin,
witch-hazel, roden-quicken, roden-quicken-royan, roun, or ran-tree,
which had been gathered on the second of May (observe this), wound
round with some dozens of yards of red thread, placed visible in the
window to act as a charm in keeping witches and Boggle-boes from the
house. So also we have--


  "'Rowan-ash and reed thread
    Keep the devils from their speed.'"

    Ye brade o' witches, ye can do no good to yourself.

    Fair they came,
    Fair they go,
    And always their heels behind them.

    Neither so sinful as to sink, nor so godly as to swim.

    Falser than Waghorn, and he was nineteen times falser than
    the devil.

    Ingratitude is worse than witchcraft.

    Ye're as mitch
    As half a witch.

    To milk the tether (i.e., the cow-tie).


This refers to a belief that witches can carry off the milk from any
one's cow by milking at the end of the tether.


        Go in God's name--so you ride no witches.

    "Rynt, you witch!" quoth Bess Lockit to her mother.


Rynt, according to Skeat, is the original Cumberland word for "aroint,"
i.e., "aroint thee, get thee gone." Icelandic ryma--"to make room,
to clear the way"--given, however, only as a guess. It seems to have
been specially applied to witches.


    "'Aroint thee, witch!' the rump-fed ronyon cried."

                                                 ("Macbeth").


Halliwell gives the word as rynt, and devotes a column to it,
without coming to any satisfactory conclusion. I think it is simply
the old word rynt or wrynt, another form of writhe, meaning to twist
or strangle, as if one should say, "Be thou strangled!" which was
indeed a frequent malediction. Halliwell himself gives "wreint"
as meaning "awry," and "wreith destordre"--"to wring or wreith"
("Hollyband's Dictionarie," 1593). The commonest curse of English
gypsies at the present day is "Beng tasser tute!" "May the devil
strangle you"--literally twist, which is an exact translation of
wrinthe or rynt.


   "The gode man to hys cage can goo
    And wrythed the pye's neck yn to."

                             ("MS. Cantab." ap. H.)


Rynt may mean twist away, i.e., begone, as they say in America,
"he wriggled away."


    They that burn you for a witch lose all their coals.

    Never talk of witches on a Friday.

    Ye're ower aude ffarand to be fraid o' witches.

    Witches are most apt to confess on a Friday.

    Friday is the witches' Sabbath.

    To hug one as the devil hugs a witch.

                      As black    }
                      As cross    }
                      As ugly     } as a witch.
                      As sinful   }

  Four fingers and a thumb--witch, I defy thee.


In Italy the signs are made differently. In Naples the gettatura
consists of throwing out the fore and middle fingers, so as to imitate
horns, with the thumb and fingers closed. Some say the thumb should
be within the middle and third fingers. In Florence the anti-witch
gesture is to fare la fica, or stick the thumb out between the fore
and middle fingers.


    You're like a witch, you say your prayers backward.

    Witch-wood (i.e., the mountain ash).

    You're half a witch--i.e., very cunning.

    Buzz! buzz! buzz!


"In the middle of the sixteenth century if a person waved his hat
or bonnet in the air and cried 'Buzz!' three times, under the belief
that by this act he could take the life of another, the old law and
law-makers considered the person so saying and acting to be worthy of
death, he being a murderer in intent, and having dealings with witches"
("Denham Tract"). Very doubtful, and probably founded on a well known
old story.


    "I wish I was as far from God as my nails are free from dirt!"


Said to have been a witch's prayer whilst she was in the act of
cleaning her nails. In logical accuracy this recalls the black boy
in America, who on being asked if he knew the way to a certain place,
replied, "I only wish I had as many dollars as I know my way there."


    A witch is afraid of her own blood.

    A Pendle forest witch.

    A Lancashire witch.

    A witch cannot greet (i.e., weep).

    To be hog, or witch-ridden.




GYPSIES.


    So many gypsies, so many smiths.

    The gypsies are all akin.

    One of the Faw gang,
    Worse than the Faw gang.


The Faws or Faas are a gypsy family whose head-quarters are at
Yetholme. I have been among them and knew the queen of the gypsies
and her son Robert, who were of this clan or name.

"It is supposed the Faws acquired this appellation from Johnnie Faw,
lord and earl of Little Egypt; with whom James the Fourth and Queen
Mary, sovereigns of Scotland, saw not only the propriety, but also
the necessity of entering into special treaty" ("Denham Tract").

"Francis Heron, king of the Faws, bur. (Yarrow) xiii. Jan., 1756"
(Sharp's "Chron. Mir").




FAIRIES.


        Where the scythe cuts and the sock rives,
        No more fairies and bee-hives.

    Laugh like a pixy (i.e., fairy).

    Waters locked! waters locked! (A favourite cry of fairies.)

    Borram! borram! borram! (The cry of the Irish fairies after
    mounting their steeds. Equivalent to the Scottish cry,
   "Horse! horse and hattock!")

    To live in the land of the Fair family. (A Welsh fairy saying.)

    God grant that the fairies may put money in your shoes and keep
    your house clean. (One of the good wishes of the old time.)

    Fairies comb goats' beards every Friday.

    He who finds a piece of money will always find another in the
    same place, so long as he keeps it a secret. (In reference to
    fairy gifts.)

    It's going on, like Stokepitch's can.


A pixey or fairy saying, used in Devonshire. The family of Stokespitch
or Sukespic resided near Topsham, and a barrel of ale in their
cellars had for many years run freely without being exhausted. It
was considered a valuable heirloom, and was esteemed accordingly,
till an inquisitive maidservant took out the bung to ascertain the
cause why it never run dry. On looking into the cask she found it
full of cobwebs, but the fairies, it would seem, were offended,
for on turning the cock, as usual, the ale had ceased to flow.

It was a common reply at Topsham to the inquiry how any affair wen on:
"It's going on like Stokepitch's can," or proceeding prosperously.


    To laugh like Robin Goodfellow.

        To laugh like old Bogie;
        He caps Bogie.

    (Amplified to "He caps Bogie, and Bogie capped old Nick.")

    To play the Puck. (An Irish saying, equivalent to the English one,
   "To play the deuce or devil." Keightley's "Fairy Mythology.")

    He has got into Lob's pound or pond. (That is, into the fairies'
    pinfold. Keightley's "Fairy Mythology.")

    Pinch like a fairy. ("Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders,
    sides, and shins." "Merry Wives of Windsor.")

    To be fairy-struck. (The paralysis is, or rather perhaps was,
    so called. Keightley's "Fairy Mythology.")

    There has never been a merry world since the Phynoderee lost
    his ground. [A Manx fairy saying. See Train's "Isle of Man,"
    ii. p. 148. "Popular Rhymes of the Isle of Man," pp. 16, 17.]

    To be pixey-led.


Led astray by fairies or goblins. "When a man has got a wee drap ower
muckle whuskey, misses his way home, and gets miles out of his direct
course, he tells a tale of excuse and whiles lays the blame on the
innocent pixies" (see Keightley's "Fairy Mythology"). Also recalling
Feufollet, or the Will o' the Wisp, and the traveller who


              "thro' bog and bush
    Was lantern-led by Friar Rush."


Gypsies have from their out of doors life much familiarity with these
"spirits" whom they call mullo dudia, or mullo doods, i.e., dead or
ghost lights. For an account of the adventure of a gypsy with them,
see "The English Gypsies and their Language," by C. G. Leland. London:
Trübner & Co. "Pyxie-led is to be in a maze, to be bewildered as if
led out of the way by hobgoblins or puck, or one of the fairies. The
cure is to turn one of your garments the inside outward; some say that
is for a woman to turn her cap inside outward, and for a man to do the
same with some of his clothes" (MS. "Devon Glimpses"--Halliwell). "Thee
pixie-led in Popish piety" (Clobery's "Divine Glimpses," 1659).


    The fairies' lanthorn.


That is the glow-worm. In America a popular story represents an
Irishman as believing that a fire-fly was a mosquito "sakin' his prey
wid a lanthorn."


    God speed you, gentlemen!


"When an Irish peasant sees a cloud of dust sweeping along the road,
he raises his hat and utters this blessing in behoof of ye company of
invisible fairies who, as he believes, caused it" ("Fairy Mythology").


    The Phooka have dirtied the blackberries.


Said when the fruit of the blackberry is spoiled through age or covered
with dust at the end of the season. In the North of England we say
"the devil has set his foot on the Bumble-Kites" ("Denham Tract").


    Fairy, fairy, bake me a bannock and roast me a collop,
    And I'll give ye a spintle off my god end.


"This is spoken three times by the Clydesdale peasant when ploughing,
because he believes that on getting to the end of the fourth furrow
those good things will be found spread out on the grass" (Chambers'
"Popular Rhymes, Scotland," 3rd ed. p. 106).


    Turn your clokes (i.e., coats),
    For fairy folkes
    Are in old oakes.


"I well remember that on more occasions than one, when a schoolboy,
I have turned and worn my coat inside out in passing through a wood
in order to avoid the 'good people.' On nutting days, those glorious
red-letter festivals in the schoolboy's calendar, the use pretty
generally prevailed. The rhymes in the text are the English formula"
("Denham Tract").


    He's got Pigwiggan.


"Vulgarly called Peggy Wiggan. A severe fall or somerset is so termed
in the B'prick. The fairy Pigwiggan is celebrated by Drayton in his
Nymphidia" ("Denham Tract"). To which may be added a few more from
other sources.


    Do what you may, say what you can,
    No washing e'er whitens the black Zingan.

                                        ("Firdusi.")

    For every gypsy that comes to toon,
    A hen will be a-missing soon,
    And for every gypsy woman old,
    A maiden's fortune will be told.

    Gypsy hair and devil's eyes,
    Ever stealing, full of lies,
    Yet always poor and never wise.

    He who has never lived like a gypsy does not know how to enjoy
    life as a gentleman.


I never enjoyed the mere living as regards all that constitutes
ordinary respectable life so keenly as I did after some weeks of
great hunger, exposure, and misery, in an artillery company in 1863,
at the time of the battle of Gettysburg.


    Zigeuner Leben Greiner Leben. (Gipsy life a groaning life. Korte's
   "Sprichwörter d. D.")

    Er taugt nicht zum Zigeuner. Spottisch vom Lügner gesagt weil er
    nicht wahr-sagt. (Korte, "Sprichwörter.")


"He would not do for a gypsy." Said of a liar because he cannot tell
the truth. In German to predict or tell fortunes also means to speak
truly, i.e., wahr = true, and sprechen = to speak.


    Gypsy repentance for stolen hens is not worth much. (Old German
    Saying.)

        The Romany chi
        And the Romany chal
        Love luripen
        And lutchipen
        And dukkeripen
        And huknipen
        And every pen
        But latchipen
        And tatchipen.

        The gypsy woman
        And gypsy man
        Love stealing
        And lewdness
        And fortune telling
        And lying
        And every pen
        But shame
        And truth.

    Pen is the termination of all verbal nouns.

                                (George Borrow, Quoted from memory.)

    It's a winter morning.


Meaning a bad day, or that matters look badly. In allusion to the
Winters, a gypsy clan with a bad name.


    As wild as a gypsy.

    Puro romaneskoes. (In the old gypsy fashion.)

    Sie hat 'nen Kobold. ("She has a brownie, or house-fairy.")


"Said of a girl who does everything deftly and readily. In some
places the peasants believe that a fairy lives in the house, who
does the work, brings water or wood, or curries the horses. Where
such a fairy dwells, all succeeds if he or she is kindly treated"
(Korte's "German Proverbs").


    "Man siehet wohl wess Geisters Kind Sie (Er) ist."


"One can well see what spirit was his sire." In allusion to men of
singular or eccentric habits, who are believed to have been begotten
by the incubus, or goblins, or fairies. There are ceremonies by which
spirits may be attracted to come to people in dreams.

"There was a young man who lived near Monte Lupo, and one day he found
in a place among some old ruins a statue of a fate (fairy or goddess)
all naked. He set it up in its shrine, and admiring it greatly
embraced it with love (ut semen ejus profluit super statuam). And
that night and ever after the fate came to him in his dreams and lay
with him, and told him where to find treasures, so that he became a
rich man. But he lived no more among men, nor did he after that ever
enter a church. And I have heard that any one who will do as he did
can draw the fate to come to him, for they are greatly desirous to
be loved and worshipped by men as they were in the Roman times."

The following are Hungarian or Transylvanian proverbs:--


    False as a Tzigane, i.e., gypsy.

    Dirty as a gypsy.

    They live like gypsies (said of a quarrelsome couple).

    He moans like a guilty Tzigane (said of a man given to useless
    lamenting).

    He knows how to plow with the gypsies (said of a liar). Also:
    "He knows how to ride the gypsies' horse."

    He knows the gypsy trade (i.e., he is a thief).

    Tzigane weather (i.e., a showery day).

    It is gypsy honey (i.e., adulterated).

    A gypsy duck i.e., a poor sort of wild duck.

    "The gypsy said his favourite bird would be the pig if it had
    only wings" (in allusion to the gypsy fondness for pork).


Mrs. Gerard gives a number of proverbs as current among Hungarian
gypsies which appear to be borrowed by them from those of other
races. Among them are:--


    Who would steal potatoes must not forget the sack.

    The best smith cannot make more than one ring at a time.

    Nothing is so bad but it is good enough for somebody.

    Bacon makes bold.

    "He eats his faith as the gypsies ate their church."


A Wallach proverb founded on another to the effect that the gypsy
church was made of pork and the dogs ate it. I shall never forget how
an old gypsy in Brighton laughed when I told her this, and how she
repeated: "O Romani kangri sos kerdo ballovas te i juckli hawde lis."


    "No entertainment without gypsies."


In reference to gypsy musicians who are always on hand at every
festivity.


    The Hungarian wants only a glass of water and a gypsy fiddler to
    make him drunk.


In reference to the excitement which Hungarians experience in listening
to gypsy music.


    With a wet rag you can put to flight a whole village of gypsies
    (Hungarian).


It would not be advisable to attempt this with any gypsies in Great
Britain, where they are almost, without exception, only too ready to
fight with anybody.


    Every gypsy woman is a witch.

   "Every woman is at heart a witch."


In the "Materials for the Study of the Gypsies," by M. I. Kounavine,
which I have not yet seen, there are, according to A. B. Elysseeff
(Gypsy-Lore Journal, July, 1890), three or four score of gypsy
proverbial sayings and maxims. These refer to Slavonian or far Eastern
Russian Romanis. I may here state in this connection that all who
are interested in this subject, or aught relating to it, will find
much to interest them in this journal of the Gypsy-Lore Society,
printed by T. & A. Constable, Edinburgh. The price of subscription,
including membership of the society, is £1 a year--Address: David
Mac Ritchie, 4, Archibald Place, Edinburgh.








CHAPTER XIV. [21]

A GYPSY MAGIC SPELL.--HOKKANI BASO--LELLIN DUDIKABIN, OR THE GREAT
SECRET--CHILDREN'S RHYMES AND INCANTATIONS--TEN LITTLE INDIAN BOYS
AND TEN LITTLE ACORN GIRLS OF MARCELLUS BURDIGALENSIS.


There is a meaningless rhyme very common among children. It is repeated
while "counting off"--or "out"--those who are taking part in a game,
and allotting to each a place. There are many versions of it, but
the following is exactly word for word what I learned when a boy
in Philadelphia:--


    Ekkeri (or ickery), akkery, u-kéry an,
    Fillisi', follasy, Nicholas John,
    Queebee-quabee--Irishman (or, Irish Mary),
    Stingle 'em--stangle 'em--buck!


With a very little alteration in sounds, and not more than children
make of these verses in different places, this may be read as
follows:--


    Ek-keri (yekori) akairi, you kair an,
    Fillissin, follasy, Nákelas jan
    Kivi, kávi--Irishman,
    Stini, stani--buck!


This is, of course, nonsense, but it is Romany or gypsy nonsense,
and it may be thus translated very accurately:--


    First--here--you begin!
    Castle, gloves. You don't play!
                Go on!
    Kivi--a kettle. How are you?
    Stáni, buck.


The common version of the rhyme begins with--


    "One--ery--two--ery, ickery an."


But one-ery is an exact translation of ek-keri; ek, or yek, meaning
one in gypsy. (Ek-orus, or yek-korus, means once). And it is remarkable
that in--


   "Hickory dickory dock,
    The rat ran up the clock,
    The clock struck one,
    And down he run,
    Hickory dickory dock."


We have hickory, or ek-keri, again followed by a significant one. It
may be observed that; while my first quotation abounds in what are
unmistakably Romany words, I can find no trace of any in any other
child-rhymes of the kind. I lay stress on this, for if I were a great
Celtic scholar I should not have the least difficulty in proving that
every word in every rhyme, down to "Tommy, make room for your uncle,"
was all old Irish or Gaelic.

Word for word every person who understands Romany will admit the
following:--


    Ek, or yek, means one. Yekorus, ekorus, or yeckori, or ekkeri,
    once.

    U-kair-an. You kair an, or begin. Kair is to make or do, ankair
    to begin. "Do you begin?"

    Fillissin is a castle, or gentleman's country seat (H. Smith).

    Follasi, or follasy, is a lady's glove.

    Nakelas. I learned this word from an old gypsy. It is used
    as equivalent to don't, but also means ná (kélas), you don't
    play. From kel-ava, I play.

    Ján, Ja-an, Go on. From java, I go. Hindu, jána, and jáo.

    Kivi, or keevy. No meaning.

    Kavi, a kettle, from kekavi, commonly given as kavi. Greek,
    kekkabos. Hindu, kal, a box.

    Stini. No meaning that I know.

    Stáni. A buck.

    Of the last line it may be remarked that if we take from ingle
    'em (angle 'em), which is probably added for mere jingle, there
    remains stán, or stáni, "a buck," followed by the very same word
    in English.


With the mournful examples of Mr. Bellenden Kerr's efforts to show
that all our old proverbs, saws, sayings, and tavern signs are Dutch,
and Sir William Betham's Etruscan-Irish, and the works of an army of
"philologists," who consider mere chance resemblance to be a proof of
identical origin, I should be justly regarded as one of the seekers
for mystery in moonshine if I declared that I positively believed
this to be Romany. But it certainly contains words which, without any
stretching or fitting, are simply gypsy, and I think it not improbable
that it was some sham charm used by some Romany fortune-teller
to bewilder Gorgios. Let the reader imagine the burnt-sienna,
wild-cat-eyed old sorceress performing before a credulous farm-wife
and her children, the great ceremony of hakkni pánki--which Mr. Borrow
calls hokkani baro, but for which there is a far deeper name--that of
"the great secret"--which even my best Romany friends tried to conceal
from me. This is to lel dudikabin--to "take lightment." In the oldest
English canting, lightment occurs as an equivalent for theft--whether
it came from Romany, or Romany from it, I cannot tell.

This feat--which is described by almost every writer on Gypsies--is
performed by inducing some woman of largely magnified faith to believe
that there is hidden in her house a magic treasure, which can only be
made "to come to hand" by depositing in the cellar another treasure,
to which it will come by natural affinity and attraction. "For gold,
as you sees, draws gold, my deari, and so if you ties up all your money
in a pocket-handkercher, an' leaves it, you'll find it doubled. An'
wasn't there the Squire's lady--you know Mrs. Trefarlo, of course--and
didn't she draw two hundred old gold guineas out of the ground where
they'd laid in an old grave--and only one guinea she gave me for all
my trouble; an' I hope you'll do better than that for the poor old
gypsy, my deari----."

The gold and the spoons are all tied up--for, as the enchantress
sagely observes, "there may be silver to"--and she solemnly repeats
over it magical rhymes, while the children, standing around in awe,
listen to every word. It is a good subject for a picture. Sometimes
the windows are closed, and candles lighted--to add to the effect. The
bundle is left or buried in a certain place. The next day the gypsy
comes and sees how the charm is working. Could any one look under
her cloak, he might find another bundle precisely resembling the one
containing the treasure. She looks at the precious deposit, repeats
her rhyme again solemnly and departs, after carefully charging the
house-wife that the bundle must not be touched, looked at, or spoken
of for three weeks. "Every word you tell about it, my deari, will
be a guinea gone away." Sometimes she exacts an oath on the Bible,
when she chivs o manzin apré laatti--that nothing shall be said.

Back to the farmer's house never again. After three weeks another
Extraordinary Instance of Gross Credulity appears in the country
paper, and is perhaps repeated in a colossal London daily, with a
reference to the absence of the schoolmaster. There is wailing and
shame in the house--perhaps great suffering--for it may be that the
savings of years, and bequeathed tankards, and marriage rings, and
inherited jewellery, and mother's souvenirs have been swept away. The
charm has worked.

"How can people be such fools!" Yea--how can they? How can fully
ninety-nine out of one hundred, and I fear me nine hundred and
ninety-nine out of a thousand, be capable of what amounts to precisely
the same thing--paying out their cash in the hopes that the Invisible
Influences in the Inscrutable Cellar or Celestial Garret will pay it
back to them, cent. per cent.? Oh, reader, if you be of middle age
(for there are perhaps some young agnostics beginning to appear to
whom the cap does not fit), and can swear on your hat that you never
in your life have been taken in by a dudikabin in any form--send me
your name and I will award you for an epitaph that glorious one given
in the Nugæ Venales:


    "Hic jacet ille qui unus fuit inter mille!"


The charm has worked. But the little sharp-eared children remember it,
and sing it over, and the more meaningless it sounds in their ears,
the more mysterious does it become. And they never talk about the
bundle--which when opened was found to contain only stones, sticks,
and rags--without repeating it. So it goes from mouth to mouth, until,
all mutilated, it passes current for even worse nonsense than it was
at first. It may be observed, however--and the remark will be fully
substantiated by any one who knows the gypsy language--that there
is a Romany turn to even the roughest corners of these rhymes. Kivi,
stingli, stangli, are all gypsyish. But, as I have already intimated,
this does not appear in any other nonsense verses of the kind. There
is nothing of it in--


    "Intery, mintery, cutery corn,"


or in anything else in "Mother Goose." It is alone in its sounds
and sense--or nonsense. But there is not a wanderer on the roads in
England who on hearing it would not exclaim, "There's a great deal
of Romanes in that ere!" And if any one doubts it let him try it on
any gypsy who has an average knowledge of Romany.

I should say that the word Na-Kelas, which means literally "Do
not play," or, "You do not play," was explained to me by a gypsy
as signifying not speaking, or keeping quiet. Nicholas John has
really no meaning, but "You don't play--go on," fits exactly into a
counting-out game.

The mystery of mysteries in the Romany tongue--of which I have
spoken--is this: The hokkani baro, or huckeny boro, or great trick,
consists of three parts. Firstly, the getting into a house or into the
confidence of its owner, which is effected in England by offering small
wares for sale, or by begging for food, but chiefly by fortune-telling,
the latter being the usual pretence in America. If the gypsy woman be
at all prepared, she will have learned enough to amaze "the lady of
the house," who is thereby made ready to believe anything. The second
part of the trick is the conveying away the property, which is, as I
have said, to lel dudikabin, or "take lightning," possibly connected
with the old canting term for conveyance of bien lightment. There is
evidently a confusion of words here. And third is to "chiv o manzin
apré lati" to put the oath upon her--the victim--by which she binds
herself not to speak of the affair for some weeks. When the deceived
are all under oath not to utter a word about the trick, the gypsy
mother has a safe thing of it.

The hakkani boro, or great trick, or dudikabin, was brought by
the gypsies from the East. It has been practised by them all over
the world, and is still played every day somewhere. And I have
read in the Press of Philadelphia that a Mrs. Brown--whom I sadly
and reluctantly believe is the wife of an acquaintance of mine who
walks before the world in other names--was arrested for the same old
game of fortune-telling, and persuading a simple dame that there was
treasure in the house, and all the rest of the "grand deception." And
Mrs. Brown--"good old Mrs. Brown"--went to prison, where she doubtless
lingered until a bribed alderman, or a purchased pardon, or some one of
the numerous devices by which justice is easily evaded in Pennsylvania,
delivered her.

Yet it is not a good country on the whole for hakkani boro, since
the people, especially in the rural districts, have a rough and ready
way of inflicting justice, which sadly interferes with the profits of
aldermen and other politicians. Some years ago, in Tennessee, a gypsy
woman robbed a farmer of all he was worth. Now it is no slander to say
that the rural folk of Tennessee resemble Indians in several respects,
and when I saw thousands of them during the Civil War, mustered out
in Nashville, I often thought, as I studied these dark brown faces,
high cheek-bones, and long, straight, wiry hair, that the American
is indeed reverting to the aboriginal type. The Tennessee farmer and
his friends reverted to it at any rate with a vengeance, for they
turned out altogether, hunted the gypsies down, and having secured
the sorceress, burned her alive at the stake. Which has been, as I
believe, "an almighty warning" to the Romany in that sad section of
the world. And thus in a single crime, and its consequence, we have
curiously combined a world-old Oriental offence, an European Middle
Age penalty for witchcraft, and the fierce torture of the Red Indian.

In the United States there is often to be found in a gypsy camp a
negro or two who has with no great trouble adopted a life of perfect
laziness. I infer that these men and brothers have not improved much
in their morals, since a few years ago a coloured sorcerer appeared in
Philadelphia, who, as I was assured, "persuaded half the niggers in
Lombard Street to dig up their cellars to find treasure--and carried
off all the treasures they had." He had been, like Matthew Arnold's
scholar, among the tents of the Romany, and had learned their peculiar
wisdom, and turned it to profit.

In Germany the Great Sorcery is practised with variations, and indeed
in England or America or anywhere it is modified in many ways to
suit the victims. The following methods are described by Dr. Richard
Liebich, in "Die Zigeuner in ihrem Wesen und in ihrer Sprache"
(Leipzig, 1863):--


   "When a gypsy has found some old peasant who has the reputation of
    being rich or very well-to-do he sets himself to work with utmost
    care to learn the disposition of the man with every possible detail
    as to his house and habits." (It is easy and congenial work to
    people who pass their lives in learning all they can of other
    folks' affairs to aid in fortune-telling, to find out the soft
    spots, as Sam Slick calls the peculiarities by which a man may be
    influenced.) "And so some day, when all the rest of the family are
    in the fields, the gypsy--man or woman--comes, and entering into
    a conversation, leads it to the subject of the house, remarking
    that it is a belief among his people that in it a treasure lies
    buried. He offers, if he may have permission to take it away,
    to give one-fourth, a third, or a half its value. This all seems
    fair enough, but the peasant is greedy and wants more. The gypsy,
    on his side, also assumes suspicion and distrust. He proves that
    he is a conjuror by performing some strange tricks--thus he takes
    an egg from under a hen, breaks it, and apparently brings out a
    small human skull or some strange object, and finally persuades the
    peasant to collect all his coin and other valuables in notes, gold,
    or silver, into a bundle, cautioning him to hold them fast. He
    must go to bed and put the packet under his pillow, while he, the
    conjuror, finds the treasure. This done--probably in a darkened
    room--he takes a bundle of similar appearance which he has quickly
    prepared, and under pretence of facilitating the operation and
    putting the man into a proper position, takes the original package
    and substitutes another. Then the victim is cautioned that it is
    of the utmost importance for him to lie perfectly still;"

       "Nor move his hand nor blink his 'ee
        If ever he hoped the goud to see;
        For aye aboot on ilka limb,
        The fairies had their 'een on him."


The gypsy is over the hills and far far away ere the shades of evening
fall, and the family returning from their fields find the father in
bed refusing to speak a word; for he has been urgently impressed with
the assertion that the longer he holds his tongue and keeps the affair
a secret the more money he will make. And the extreme superstition of
the German peasant is such that when obliged to tell the truth he often
believes that all his loss is due to a premature forced revelation of
what he has done--for the gypsy in many cases has the cheek to caution
the victim that if he speaks too soon the contents of the package
will be turned to sand or rags--accordingly as he has prepared it.

Another and more impudent manner of playing this pretended sorcery,
is to persuade the peasant that he must have a thick cloth tied
around his head, and if any one addresses him to reply only by what
in German is called brummen--uttering a kind of growl. This he does,
when the entire party proceed to carry off everything portable--


   "Chairs and tables knives and forks,
    Tankards and bottles and cups and corks,
    Beds and dishes and boots and kegs,
    Bacon and puddings and milk and eggs,
    The carpet lying on the floor,
    And the hams hung up for the winter store,
    Every pillow and sheet and bed,
    The dough in the trough and the baken bread,
    Every bit of provant or pelf;
    All that they left was the house itself."


One may imagine what the scene is like when the rest return and find
the house plundered, the paterfamilias sitting in the ruins with his
head tied up, answering all frantic queries with brum--brum--brum! It
may recall the well-known poem--I think it is by Peter Pindar
Wolcott--of the man who was persuaded by a bet to make the motion
of a pendulum, saying, "Here she goes--there she goes!" while the
instigator "cleared out the house and then cleared out himself." I
have little doubt that this poem was drawn from a Romany original.

Or yet, again, the gypsy having obtained the plunder and substituted
the dummy packet, persuades the true believer to bury it in the barn,
garden, field, or a forest, performs magic ceremonies and repeats
incantations over it, and cautions him to dig it up again, perhaps
six months later on a certain day, it may be his saint's or birth
day, and to keep silence till then. The gypsy makes it an absolute
condition--nay, he insists very earnestly on it--that the treasure
shall not be dug up unless he himself is on the spot to share the
spoil. But as he may possibly be prevented from coming, he tells the
peasant how to proceed: he leaves with him several pieces of paper
inscribed with cabalistic characters which are to be burnt when the
money is removed, and teaches him what he is to repeat while doing
it. With sequence as before.

It might be urged by the gypsy that the taking a man's money
from him under the conditions that he shall get it all back with
immense interest six months after, does not differ materially from
persuading him to give his property to Brahmins, or even priests,
with the understanding that he is to be amply rewarded for it in a
future state. In both cases the temptation to take the money down
is indeed great--as befel a certain very excellently honest but
extremely cautious Scotch clergyman, to whom there once came a very
wicked and wealthy old reprobate who asked him, "If I gie a thousand
puns till the kirk d'ye think it wad save my soul?" "I'm na preparit
to preceesely answer that question," said the shrewd dominie, "but
I would vara urgently advise ye to try it."

Oh thou who persuadest man that for money down great good shall result
to him from any kind of spiritual incantation--twist and turn it as
ye will--mutato nomine, de te fabula narratur:


   "With but a single change of name,
    The story fits thee quite the same."


And few and far between are the Romanys--or even the Romans--who
would not "vara earnestly advise ye to try it."

Since I wrote that last line I have met, in the Journal of American
Folk-Lore, with a very interesting article on the Counting-out Rhymes
of Children, in which the writer, H. Carrington Bolton, avows his
belief that these doggerel verses or rhymes are the survivals of
sortileges or divination by lot, and that it was practised among the
ancient heathen nations as well as the Israelites:--


   "The use of the lot at first received divine sanction, as in the
    story of Achan related by Joshua, but after this was withheld
    the practice fell into the hands of sorcerers--which very name
    signifies lot-taker. The doggerels themselves I regard as a
    survival of the spoken charms used by sorcerers in ancient times
    in conjunction with their mystic incantations. There are numerous
    examples of these charms, such as--

      "'Huat Hanat Huat ista pista sista domiabo damnaustra.'

                                                    (Cato, 235 B.C.)

   "And--

      "'Irriori, ririori essere rhuder fere.'

   "And--

      "'Meu, treu, mor, phor
        Teux, za, zor
        Phe, lou, chri,
        Ge, ze, on.'

                        (Alexander of Tralles.)

   "Tylor in his 'Primitive Culture' holds that things which occupy an
    important place in the life-history of grown men in a savage state
    become the playthings of children in a period of civilization;
    thus the sling and the bow and arrow, which formed the weapons
    of mankind in an early stage of its existence, and are still
    the reliance of savage tribes, have become toys in the hands of
    all civilized children at the present day. Many games current in
    Europe and America are known to be sportive imitations of customs
    which formerly had a significant and serious aspect.

   "Adopting this theory, I hold that counting-out is a survival of
    the practice of the sorcerer, using this word in its restricted
    and etymological meaning, and that the spoken and written charms
    originally used to enforce priestly power have become adjuncts to
    these puerile games, and the basis of the counting-out doggrels
    under consideration.

   "The idea that European and American children engaged in
   'counting-out' for games, are repeating in innocent ignorance
    the practices and language of a sorcerer of a dark age, is
    perhaps startling, but can be shown to have a high degree of
    probability. The leader in 'counting out' performs an incantation,
    but the children grouped round him are free from that awe and
    superstitious reverence which characterized the procedure in
    its earlier state. Many circumstances make this view plausible,
    and clothe the doggrels with a new and fascinating interest."


Mr. Bolton remarks, however, that "in only one instance have I been
able to directly connect a child's counting-out rhyme with a magic
spell. According to Leland the rhyme beginning with


    'One-ery, two-ery, ickery, Ann,'


is a gypsy magic spell in the Romany language."

It occurred to me long, long ago, or before ever the name "Folk-lore"
existed, that children's rhymes were a survival of incantations, and
that those which are the same backward and forward were specially
adapted to produce marvellous effects in lots. But there was one
form of counting-out which was common as it was terrible. This was
used when after a victory it was usual to put every tenth captive
to death--whence the greatly abused word to "decimate"--or any
other number selected. When there was a firm belief in the virtues
of numbers as set forth by Pythagoras, and Plato in the Timæus,
and of cabalistic names inspired by the "Intelligences," it is not
remarkable that the diviners or priests or sorcerers or distributors
of sortes and sortileges should endeavour to prove that life and
death lay bound up in mystic syllables. That there were curious and
occult arithmetical means of counting-out and saving elected persons
is shown in certain mystic problems still existent in Boys Own Books,
and other handbooks of juvenile sports. It was the one on whom the
fatal word of life or death fell who was saved or condemned, so
that it was no wonder that the word was believed to be a subtle,
mysterious existence: an essence or principle, yea, a spirit or
all in one--diversi aspetti in un, confuse e misti. He who knew
the name of Names which, as the Chaldæan oracles of old declared,
"rushes into the infinite worlds," knew all things and had all power;
even in lesser words there lingered the fragrance of God and some
re-echo of the Bath Kol--the Daughter of the Voice who was herself
the last echo of the divine utterance. So it went down through the
ages--coming, like Cæsar's clay, to base uses--till we now find the
sacred divination by words a child's play: only that and nothing more.

Truly Mr. Bolton spoke well when he said that such reflection clothes
these doggerels with a new and fascinating interest. Now and then some
little thing awakens us to the days of old, the rosy, early morning
of mankind, when the stars of magic were still twinkling in the sky,
and the dreamer, hardly awake, still thought himself communing with
God. So I was struck the other day when a gypsy, a deep and firm
believer in the power of the amulet, and who had long sought, yet
never found, his ideal, was deeply moved when I showed him the shell
on which Nav, or the Name, was mystically inscribed by Nature. Through
the occult and broken traditions of his tribe there had come to him
also, perhaps from Indian or Chaldæan sources, some knowledge of the
ancient faith in its power.

I think that I can add to the instance of a child's counting-out game
based on a magic spell, yet another. Everybody knows the song of John
Brown who had


   "Ten little, nine little, eight little, seven little, Six little
    Indian boys;
    Five little, four little, three little, two little, One little
    Indian boy, [22]


And of the fate which overtook them all, one by one, inevitable as
the decrees of Nemesis. This song is in action a game. I have heard
it in Romany from a gypsy, and have received from a gypsy scholar
another version of it, though I am sure that both were versions from
the English. But in Romany, as in all languages, there have existed
what may be called additional and subtractive magic songs, based on
some primæval Pythagorean principle of the virtues of numbers, and,
as regards form, quite like that of the ten little Indians. In the
charms of Marcellus Burdigalensis (third century), it appears as a
cure for pains or disorders in the jaws (remedium valde certum et
utile faucium doloribus), in the Song of the Seven Acorn Sisters,
which the Latin-Gaul doctor describes as carmen mirum, in which
opinion the lover of Folk-lore will heartily concur.


   "Carmen mirum ad Glandulas.

   "Glandulas mane carminabis, si dies minuetur, si nox ad vesperam,
    et digito medicinali ac pollice continens eas dices:--

       "Novem glandulæ sorores,
        Octo glandulæ sorores,
        Septem glandulæ sorores,
        Sex glandulæ sorores,
        Quinque glandulæ sorores,
        Quatuor glandulæ sorores,
        Tres glandulæ sorores,
        Duæ glandulæ sorores,
        Una glandula soror!

        Novem fiunt glandulæ,
        Octo fiunt glandulæ,
        Septem fiunt glandulæ,
        Sex fiunt glandulæ,
        Quinque fiunt glandulæ,
        Quattuor fiunt glandulæ,
        Tres fiunt glandulæ,
        Duæ fiunt glandulæ,
        Una fit glandula,
        Nulla fit glandula!"

    (I.e., "Nine little acorn sisters (or girls), Eight little acorn
    sisters," &c.)


This is simply the same count, forwards and backwards.

It rises before us as we read--a chorus of rosy little Auluses and
Marcellas, Clodias, and Manliuses, screaming in chorus:--


   "Ten little, nine little, eight little, seven little, Six little
    acorn girls!"


Until it was reduced to una glandula et nulla fit--"then there was
none." They too had heard their elders repeat it as a charm against
the jaw-ache--and can any man in his senses doubt that they applied
it in turn to the divine witchcraft of fun and the sublime sorcery
of sport, which are just as magical and wonderful in their way as
anything in all theurgia or occultism, especially when the latter
is used only to excite marvels and the amazement which is only a
synonym for amusement. But it is not credible that such a palpable
"leaving out" song as that of the Ten Little Acorn Girls should not
having been utilized by such intelligent children as grew up into
being the conquerors of the world--"knowing Latin at that."

There is yet another old Roman "wonderful song to the Acorns,"
apparently for the same disorder, given by the same author.


   "Albula glandula,
    Nec doleas nec noceas.
    Nec paniculas facias,
    Sed liquescas tanquam salis (mica) in aqua!

   "Hoc ter novies dicens spues ad terram et glandulas ipsas pollice
    et digito medicinali perduces, dum carmen dices, sedante solis
    ortum et post occasum facies id, prout dies aut nox minuetur."


There appears in these formulas to be either a confusion or affinity
as regards glandulas, the tonsils, and the same word signifying small
acorns. As is very often the case, the similarity of name caused an
opinion that there must be sympathetic curative qualities. Perhaps
acorns were also used in this ceremony. In a comment on this Grimm
remarks: "Die Glandula wird angeredet, die Glandulæ gelten fur
Schwestern, wie wenn das alt hoch-deutsch druos glandula (Graff 5,
263) personification ankündigte? Alt Nordisch ist drôs, femina."

There is another child's rhyme which is self-evidently drawn from
an exorcism, that is to say an incantation. All my readers know the
nursery song:--


   "Snail, snail, come out of your hole,
    Or else I'll beat you as black as a coal!
    Snail, snail, put out your head,
    Or else I'll beat you till you are dead!"


It is very remarkable that in Folk-lore the mole and the snail are
identified, and, as De Gubernatis states, both are the same with
the grey mouse, or, as he might more accurately have declared with
the mouse in general. A critic objects to this simply because it
occurs in the work of De Gubernatis, among his "fanciful theories,"
but it need not follow that every citation or opinion in his book is
false. Friedrich, who certainly is not a fanciful theorist, asserted
nearly thirty years ago that the mouse, owing to its living underground
and in dark places as well as to its gnawing and destroying everything,
is a chthonisches Thier, one of the animals of darkness and evil. Also
"the mole, because it is of subterranean life, has received a chthonic,
demoniac, misanthropic reputation." In support of these statements he
cites a great array of authorities. The connection between the mole and
mouse is evident enough, that between both and the snail is also clear:
firstly, from the fact that "the snail of popular superstition is
demoniacal," or evil; and secondly, from the rhyme which I now quote,
which is applied to both moles and snails. According to Du Cange it
was usual in the Middle Ages for children to go about carrying poles,
on the ends of which was straw, which they lighted, and going round
the gardens and under the trees shouted:--


   "Taupes et mulots,
    Sortez de vos clos,
    Sinon je vous brulerai la barbe et les os!"


But in Germany there are two and in Italy five versions of the same
song addressed to snails. It is evidently a Roman Catholic formula,
based on some early heathen incantation. Thus in Tuscany they sing:--


   "Chiocciola marinella
    Tira fuori le tue cornelle,
    E se tu non le tirerai
    Calcie pugni tu buscherai."


Both the snail and mole and mouse were, as I have said, chthonic,
that is diabolical or of darkness. The horns of the former were
supposed to connect it with the devil. "In Tuscany it is believed
that in the month of April the snail makes love with serpents."

There is another nursery counting-out rhyme whose antiquity and
connection with sorcery is very evident. It is as follows:--


   "One, two, three, four, five,
    I caught a hare all alive.
    Six, seven, eight, nine, ten,
    I let her go again."


The following from the medical spells and charms of Marcellus
Burdigalensis manifestly explains it:--


   "Lepori vivo talum abstrahes, pilósque ejus de subventre tolles
    atque ipsum vivum dimittes. De illis pilis, vel lana filum validum
    facies et ex eo talum leporis conligabis corpusque laborantis
    præcinges; miro remedio subvenies. Efficacius tamen erit remedium,
    ita ut incredibile sit, si casu os ipsum, id est talum leporis
    in stercore lupi inveneris, quod ita custodire debes, ne aut
    terram tangat aut a muliere contingatur, sed nec filum illud
    de lana leporis debet mulier ulla contigere. Hoc autem remedium
    cum uni profuerit ad alias translatum cum volueris, et quotiens
    volueris proderit. Filum quoque, quod ex lana vel pilis, quos de
    ventre leporis tuleris, solus purus et nitidus facies, quod si
    ita ventri laborantis subligaveris plurimum proderit, ut sublata
    lana leporem vivum dimmittas, et dicas ei dum dimittis eum:

      "'Fuge, fuge, lepuscule, et tecum aufer coli dolorem!'"


That is to say, you must "first catch your hare," then pluck
from it the fur needed ad dolorem coli, then "let it go again,"
bidding it carry the disorder with it. In which the hare appears as a
scape-goat. It may be observed that all this ceremony of catching the
hare, letting it go and bidding it run and carry away the disorder,
is still in familiar use in Tuscany.

It has been observed to me that "any nursery rhyme may be used as a
charm." To this we may reply that any conceivable human utterance may
be taken for the same purpose, but this is an unfair special pleading
not connected with the main issue. Mr. Carrington Bolton admits that he
has only found one instance of coincidence between nursery rhymes and
spells, and I have compared hundreds of both with not much more result
than what I have here given. But those who are practically familiar
with such formulas recognize this affinity. On asking the Florentine
fortune-teller if she knew any children's counting-out rhymes which
deemed to her to be the same with incantations, she at once replied:--

"In witchcraft you sometimes call on people one by one by name to
bewitch them. And the little girls have a song which seems to be like
it." Then she sang to a very pretty tune:--


   "Ecco l'imbasciatore,
    Col tra le vi la lera,
    Ecco l'imbasciatrice,
    Col tra la li ra la!
    Cosa volete col tua la li la,
    Col tra le li va la,
    Voglio Giuseppina,
    Col tra le li va le va.
    Voglio la Cesarina,
      Col tra le li ra le ra.
    Voglio la Armida, &c.
    Voglio la Gesualda,
    Voglio la Barbera,
    Voglio la Bianca,
    Voglio la Fortunata,
    Voglio la Uliva,
    Voglio la Filomena,
    Voglio la Maddalena,
    Voglio la Pia,
    Voglio la Gemma,
    Voglio la Ida,
    Voglio la Lorenzina,
    Voglio la Carolina,
    Voglio la Annunciatina,
    Voglio la Margo," &c.


There is one thing of which those who deny the identity of any
counting-out rhymes with spells are not aware. These incantations
are very much in vogue with the Italian peasantry, as with the
gypsies. They are repeated on all occasions for every disorder,
for every trifle lost, for every want. Every child has heard them,
and their jingle and even their obscurity make them attractive. They
are just what children would be likely to remember and to sing over,
and the applying them to games and to "counting-out" would follow as
a matter of course. In a country where every peasant, servant-girl and
child knows at least a few spells, the wonder would be if some of these
were not thus popularized or perverted. It is one thing to sit in one's
library and demonstrate that this or that ought not to be, because it
is founded on a "theory" or "idea," and quite another to live among
people where these ideas are in active operation. Washington Irving
has recorded that one of the Dutch governors of New York achieved a
vast reputation for wisdom by shrugging his shoulders at everything
and saying, "I have my doubts as to that." And truly the race of Wouter
van Twiller is not extinct as yet by any means among modern critics.

It is worth noting in this connection that in Mrs. Valentine's Nursery
Rhymes (Camden edition) there are fifteen charms given which are all
of a magical nature.

Since the foregoing chapter was written I have obtained in Florence
several additional instances of children's rhymes which were
spells. Nearly allied to this subject of sorcery in the nursery is
The Game of the Child-stealing Witch, which, as W. Wells Newell has
shown in a very interesting and valuable contribution to the American
Folk-Lore Journal, vol. iii., April, 1890, is found in many languages
and lands.

In connection with divination, deceit, and robbery, it may be observed
that gypsies in Eastern Europe, as in India, often tell fortunes
or answer questions by taking a goblet or glass, tapping it, and
pretending to hear a voice in the ring which speaks to them. This
method of divination is one of the few which may have occurred
sporadically, or independently in different places, as there is so
much in a ringing, vibrating sound which resembles a voice. The custom
is very ancient and almost universal; so Joseph (Genesis xliv. 5)
says ("Vulgate"), "Scyphus quam furati estis, ipse est, in quo bibit
Dominus meus, et in quo augurari solet." "The goblet which ye have
stolen, is it not this wherein my lord drinketh and in which he is
wont to divine?" Joseph says again (ver. 15), "Know ye not that such
a man as I can certainly divine." A great number of very orthodox
scholars have endeavoured to show that "divine" here means merely "to
conjecture wisely," or "to see into," in order to clear Joseph from
the accusation of fortune-telling: but the cup and his interpretation
of dreams tell another story. In those days in the East, as now,
clever men made their way very often by fortune-telling and theurgia
in different forms in great families, just as ladies and gentlemen are
"invited out" in London and Paris to please the company with palmistry.

This divining by goblets is still common in the East. In Norden's
"Reise nach Egypten," &c., we are told that a native said to the
travellers that he had interrogated his coffee-cup, and it had replied
that the travellers were those of whom the Prophet had predicted
they would come as spies and lead the way for a great immigration of
Franks. In an Arabic commentary of the twelfth century the replies
which the goblet gave to Joseph when it tapped on it are given in
full. As coffee-drinking is very ancient it is probable that divination
by means of the grounds grew out of foretelling with the cup.

Horst ("Dæmonomagie," vol. ii.) remarks that "prediction by means of
drinking or coffee-cups," &c., is called in magic, Scyphomancy, and
that the reader may judge how common it was in Germany in the first
half of the eighteenth century by consulting the famous humorous poem
of the "Renomist," Song iii. ver. 47. Certain goblets of thin glass
will give out quite a loud ring if only blown upon, and by blowing
or breathing in a peculiar way the sound may be greatly increased
or modified, so as to sound like the human voice. This was shown me
by an old custode in the museum at the Hague. It is a curious trick
worth trying--especially by those who would pass for magicians!

There is yet another kind of magic cup known only by tradition,
the secret of which, I believe, I was the first to re-discover. It
is said that the Chinese knew of old how to make bottles, &c., which
appeared to be perfectly plain, but on which, when filled with wine,
inscriptions or figures appeared, and which were used in divination
as to answer questions. In the winter of 1886-87, Sir Henry Austin
Layard went with me through his glass factory at Venice. [23] As we
were standing by the furnace watching the workmen it flashed upon me
quite in a second how the mysterious old goblets of the Chinese could
be made. This would be by blowing a bottle, &c., of thin white glass
and putting on the interior in all parts except the pattern, a coating
of glass half an inch in thickness. The outside should then be lightly
ground, to conceal the heavy portion. If red wine or any dark fluid
should then be poured into the bottle the pattern would appear of the
same colour. Sir Austin Layard at once sent for his very intelligent
foreman, Signor Castellani, who said that he had indeed read of such
goblets, but that he regarded it as a fable. But when I explained to
him what had occurred to me, he said that it was perfectly possible,
but that the great expense of making such objects would probably
make the manufacture practically impossible. Apropos of which I may
mention that those who would investigate the curiosities of glass,
especially the art of making it malleable, may find a great deal in
A. Nevi, "De Arte Vitraria" (Amsterdam), and its German translation
of 1678 (which contains a chapter, "Wie die Malleabilität dem Glase
beygebracht werden könne").

It is probable that the celebrated cup of Djemschid, in Persian story,
which showed on its surface all that passed in the world, owed its
origin to these Chinese bottles.








CHAPTER XV.

GYPSY AMULETS.


                   "Knew many an amulet and charm
                    Which would do neither good nor harm,
                    In Rosicrucian lore as learned
                    As he that veré adeptus earned."--Hudibras.


With pleasant plausibility Heine has traced the origin of one kind of
fairy-lore to the associations and feelings which we form for familiar
objects. A coin, a penknife, a pebble, which has long been carried
in the pocket or worn by any one, seems to become imbued with his or
her personality. If it could speak, we should expect to hear from it
an echo of the familiar voice of the wearer; as happened, indeed, in
Thuringia in the year 1562, when a fair maid, Adelhait von Helbach,
was carried into captivity by certain ill-mannered persons. "Now her
friends, pursuing, knew not whither to go, when they heard her voice,
albeit very small and feeble, calling to them; and, seeking, they
found in the bush by the road a silver image of the Virgin, which she
had worn: and this image told them which road to take. Following the
direction, they recovered her; the Raubritter who bore her away being
broken on the wheel, and the image hung up for the glory of the Virgin,
who had spoken by it, in the Church of our Lady of Kalbrunn." Again,
these objects have such strange ways of remaining with one that we
end by suspecting that they have a will of their own. With certain
persons these small familiar friends become at last fetishes, which
bring luck, giving to those who firmly believe in them great comfort
and endurance in adversity.

Who has not been amazed at the persistency with which some button
or pebble picked up, or placed perchance in the pocket, remains
in all the migrations of keys and pencils and coins, faithful to
the charge? How some card or counter will lurk in our pocket-book
(misnamed "purse") or porte-monnaie, until it becomes clear as
daylight that it has a reasonable intelligence, and stays with us
because it wants to. As soon as this is recognized--especially by
some person who is accustomed to feel mystery in everything, and who
doubts nothing--the object becomes something which knows, possibly,
a great deal which we do not. Therefore it is to be treated with care
and respect, and in due time it becomes a kind of god, or at least
the shrine of a small respectable genius, or fairy. I have heard of
a gentleman in the Western United States who had a cane in which,
as he seriously believed, a spirit had taken up its abode, and he
reverenced it accordingly. The very ancient and widely-spread belief
in the efficiency of magic wands probably came from an early faith in
such implements as had been warranted to have magic virtues as weapons,
or to aid a pedestrian in walking. Hence it happened that swords which
had been enchanted, or which had taken lives, were supposed to have
some indwelling intelligence. Hence also the names given to swords,
and indeed to all weapons, by the Norsemen. It was believed that the
sword of an executioner, after it had beheaded a certain number of
men, pined for more victims, and manifested its desire by unearthly
rattling or ringing. Apropos of which I have in my possession such a
gruesome implement, which if experience in death could give it life,
or make it ring in the silent watches of the night, would be a ghastly,
noisy guest indeed. I once told the story in "The Gypsies" (Boston,
1881)--now I have something to add to it. I had met in London with an
Indian gypsy named Nano, who informed me that in India he had belonged
to a wandering tribe or race who called themselves Rom, or Romani,
who spoke Romani jib, and who were the Gypsies of the Gypsies. I have
in my possession a strange Hindu knife with an enormously broad blade,
six inches across towards the end, with a long handle richly mounted
in bronze with a little silver. I never could ascertain till I knew
Nano what it had been used for. Even the old king of Oude, when he
examined it, went wrong and was uncertain. Not so the gypsy. When he
was in my library, and his keen black eyes rested on it, he studied
it for a moment, and then said: "I know well enough that knife. I
have seen it before; it is very old, and it was long in use--it was
the knife used by the public executioner in Bhotan. It is Bhotani."

Nano had volunteered the explanation, and whatever his moral character
might be, he was not given to romantic invention. Time passed, I went
to America, stayed there four years, and returned. In 1888 I became
a member of the National Association for the Advancement of Art,
and was on the Central Committee. One day we had a meeting at the
house of a distinguished architect. When it was over, my host showed
me his many treasures of art, or archæology. While examining these,
my attention was attracted by an Indian knife. It was precisely
like mine, but smaller. I asked what it was, and learned that it had
long been used in some place in the East for the express purpose of
sacrificing young girls. And in all respects it was what we might call
the feminine counterpart of my knife. And if I ever had any lingering
doubt as to the accuracy of Nano's account, it disappeared when I
saw the one whose history was perfectly authentic. A few years ago in
Heidelburg there were sold at auction a great number of executioners'
swords, some of which had been used for centuries. A gentleman who
had a special fondness for this kind of bric-à-brac, had for many
years collected them.

It may be here observed that the knife forms a special feature in all
witch-lore, and occurs frequently among the Hungarian and Italian gypsy
charms, or spells. It is sometimes stuck into a table, while a spell
is muttered, protesting that it is not the wood which one wishes to
hurt, but the heart of an enemy. Here the knife is supposed in reality
to have an indwelling spirit which will pass to the heart or health
of the one hated. In Tam O'Shanter there is a knife on the witches'
table, and in Transylvania, as in Tuscany, a new knife, not an old
one, is used in divers ceremonies. Sometimes an old and curious knife
becomes an amulet and is supposed to bring luck, although the current
belief is that any pointed gift causes a quarrel.

But to return to the fetish or pocket-deity which is worn in so many
forms, be they written scrolls, crosses, medals or relics--c'est
tout un. Continental gypsies are notable believers in amulets. Being
in a camp of very wild Cigany in Hungary a few years ago, I asked
them what they wore for bakt, or luck; whereupon they all produced
small seashells, which I was assured were potent against ordinary
misfortunes. But for a babe which was really ill they had provided an
"appreciable" dose in the form of three Maria Theresa silver dollars,
which were hung round its neck, but hidden under its clothes. And I
may here remark that all through many lands, even into the heart of
Africa, this particular dollar is held in high esteem for magical
purposes. From one to another the notion has been transferred, and
travellers and traders are often puzzled to know why the savages
will have no coin save this. From Russia to the Cape it is the same
story, and one to be specially studied by those ethnologists who do
not believe in transmission, and hold that myths and legends are of
local growth and accounted for by similar local conditions.

The gypsies were very desirous to know what my charm was. Fortunately
I had in my pocket a very fine fossil shark's tooth which I had
purchased in Whitby, and this was greatly admired by the learned of
the tribe. Mindful of good example, I obtained for myself specimens
of the mystic shells, foreseeing that they would answer as passes and
signs among the fraternity in Germany and elsewhere. Which, indeed,
came to pass a few days ago in the town of Homburg, when looking from
my window in the Schwedenpfad I saw two very honest-looking gypsies
go by. Walking forth, I joined them, and led them into a garden, where
over beer and cigars we discussed "the affairs of Egypt." These Romanys
were from the Tyrol, and had the frank bold manner of the mountain-men
blended with the natural politeness of the better class of gypsy. I had
taken with me in my pocket, foreseeing its use, a small bag or purse,
containing an assortment of objects such as would have puzzled anybody
except a Red Indian, a negro, or any believer in medaolin or Voodoo,
or my new acquaintance; and after a conversation on dúrkepen (in
Anglo-gypsy, dukkerin) or fortune-telling, I asked the men what they
wore. They wished to see my amulets first. So I produced the shells;
which were at once recognized and greatly admired, especially one,
which is something of a curiosity, since in its natural markings
is the word NAV very plainly inscribed: Nav, in gypsy, meaning "the
name." The elder gypsy said he had no charm; he had long been seeking
a good one, but had not as yet met with the correct article. And then
he begged me--gracious powers, how he did beg!--to bestow on him one
of my shells. I resolved to do so--but at another time.

The younger gypsy, who was a pasche-paskero, a musician, and had with
him a rare old violin in a wonderfully carved wooden case at least
two centuries old, was "all right" on the fetish question. He had his
shell, sewn up in a black leather bag, which he wore by a cord round
his neck. Then I exhibited my small museum. Every object in it was
carefully and seriously examined. My shark's tooth was declared to be
a very good fetish, a black pebble almost equal to the shell, and an
American Indian arrow-head of quartz passed muster as of possible
though somewhat doubtful virtue. But an English sixpence with a
hole in it was rejected as a very petty and contemptible object. I
offered it in vain as a present to my friends: they would not accept
it. Neither did they want money: my dross might perish with me. It
was the shell--the precious beautiful little shell on which the Romany
in search of a fetish had set his heart; the shell which would bring
him luck, and cause him to be envied, and ensure him admiration in the
tents of the wanderers from Paris to Constantinople. He admitted that
it was the very shell of shells--a baro seréskeri sharkuni, or famous
sea-snail. I believe the gypsies would have given me their fine old
Stainer violin and the carved case for it. Failing to get the shell,
he implored me to give him the black pebble. I resolved to give him
both in free gift the next time we met, or as a parting souvenir. Alas
for the Romany chal!--we never met again. The police allow no gypsies
in Homburg, and so they had to move on. I sought them that night and I
sought them next day; but they were over the hills and far away. But I
have no doubt that the fame of the shell on which Nature has written
the Name--the very logos of magic itself--spread ere the summer was
past even to the Carpathians. Something tells me that it is not played
out yet, and that I shall hear anon something regarding it.

The cult of the shell is widely spread. One day in a public-house, in
the West End of London, I, while taking my glass of bitter, entered
into conversation with a rather tall, decently-attired brunette
Alsatian girl, who spoke French and German, and who knew a few words
of Romany, which she said she had picked up by accident--at least
she professed not to be gypsy, and to know no more. Being minded to
test the truth of this, I casually exhibited one of my shells and
said it was a Hungarian gypsy amulet for la bonne fortune. She began
to beg earnestly for it, without getting it. On several occasions at
long intervals, when I met her in the street, she again implored me
for the treasure, saying that she believed "if she had it, her luck
would turn to good." And, being convinced of her gypsyism, I said,
"It will do you no good unless you have faith." To which she replied,
in a tone which indicated truth itself: "But I have faith--absolute,
entire faith in it." Which seeing, and finding that she was a true
convert to the power of the holy shell, I gave it to her with my
blessing, knowing that it would be a joy and comfort to her in all
the trials of life.

This reminds me that I have seen, and indeed possess, a pearl-shell
bearing the image of Saint Francis of Assisi, such as is sold by
thousands at his shrine, and which are supposed to possess certain
miraculous innate or intrinsic virtues. Thus, if worn by children,
they are a cure for croup. "Ah--but that is a very different thing,
you know."

An idol is an object, generally an image, worshipped for its own
sake--being supposed to not only represent a god, but to have some
immanent sanctity. The Catholic priest, and for that matter all
Brahmins or bonzes, assure us that their sacred images are "only
symbols, not regarded as really dwelling-places of divinity." They
are not, so to speak, magnified amulets. Yet how is it that, if this
be true, so many images and pictures are regarded and represented by
priests as being able of themselves by the touch to cure tooth-ache,
and all other ills which flesh and bones are heirs to. Why is one image
especially good for tooth-ache, while another of the same person cures
cramp? Why, if they are all only "symbols," is one more healing or
holy than another? How can our Lady of Embrun be of greater aid than
our Lady of Paris? The instant we ascribe to an image or a shell real
power to act, we make of it an inspired being in itself, and all the
sophistry in the world as to its being a means of faith, or a symbol,
or causing a higher power to act on the suppliant, is rubbish. The
devotee believes tout bonnement that the image works the cure, and if
he did not, any other image of the Virgin or Saint would answer the
same purpose. This chaff has been thrashed out a thousand times--or
many tens of thousand times in vain,--as vain so far as effects go
as is the remarkably plain First Commandment. And it will last, while
one fetish endures, that the hierophant will call it a mere "symbol,"
and the ignorant worshipper, absolutely unable to comprehend him, will
worship the symbol as the thing itself--as he is really expected to do.

According to J. B. Friedrich, "Symbolik der Natur," the sea-shell, on
account of its being a product of the sea, or of the all-generating
moisture; and much more probably from its shape, is an emblem
of woman herself. Therefore as "Venus, Love's goddess, was born
of the sea," shells are dedicated to her. ("Museo Bourbonico,"
vol. vi. p. 10. Kugler, "Handbuch Geschichte der Malerei,"
Berlin, 1837, vol. iv. p. 311. Also translated by Sir H. Austin
Layard). Being one of the great emblems of productive Nature, or
of life and light, and opposed to barrenness, absence of pleasure,
darkness, or negation, it was of course a charm against witchcraft
or evil. That the gypsies have retained it as a powerful agent for
"luck," is extremely interesting, showing to what a degree they are
still influenced by the early symbolism which effectively formed not
one but many mythologies. Among the Hungarian gypsies the virtue or
magical power of a shell is in proportion to the degree of resemblance
above mentioned, which it possesses, as Wlislocki expressly declares.

This association of shells, with the mysterious and magical, is to
be found among gypsies in the East, as is shown by the following:
from my work entitled "The Gypsies." It describes something which I
saw many times in Cairo:--


   "Beyond the door which, when opened, gave this sight, was a dark,
    ancient archway, twenty yards long, which opened on the glaring,
    dusty street, where camels with their drivers, and screaming saïs
    or carriage-runners and donkey-boys and crying venders kept up the
    wonted Oriental din. But in the archway, in its duskiest corner,
    there sat in silence and immovable, a living picture--a dark,
    handsome woman, of thirty years, who was unveiled. She had
    before her on the gateway floor, a square of cloth and a few
    shells. Sometimes an Egyptian of the lower class stopped, and
    there would be a grave consultation. She was a fortune-teller,
    and from the positions which the shells assumed when thrown she
    predicted what would come to pass. And then there would be a
    solemn conference and a thoughtful stroking of the beard, if the
    applicant was a man, and then the usual payment to the oracle,
    and a departure. And it was all world-old primæval Egyptian,
    as it was Chaldæan, for the woman was a Rhagarin, or gypsy, and
    as she sat so sat the diviners of ancient days by the wayside,
    casting shells for auspices, even as arrows were cast of old,
    to be cursed by Israel.

   "It is not remarkable that among the myriad manteias of olden
    days there should have been one by shells. The sound of the sea
    when heard in a nautilus or conch is marvellously "like that of
    ocean surges murmuring far."

       "Shake me and it awakens--then apply
        Its polished lips to your attentive ear,
        And it remembers its august abodes
        And murmurs as the ocean murmurs there."


All of this is very strange to children and not less so to all
unsophisticated folk, and I can remember how in boyhood I was
told and listened with perfect faith to the distant roaring, and
marvelled at the mystery of the ocean song being thus for ever kept
alive inland. The next step to this is to hear in the sea-murmuring
something like voices, and this is as curious as it is true--that if
the mind be earnestly given to it, and the process be continued for
a long time during several days, many persons, and probably all in
time, will come to distinguish or hear human utterances and eventually
words. There is no special faith required here; the mind even of the
most sceptical or unimaginative will often turn back on itself, and
by dint of mere perseverance produce such effects. An old pitcher or
jug of a peculiar shape is also declared to be admirably adapted for
this purpose, and I have one of Elizabeth's time which was trawled
up from the sea near Lowestoft which would fulfil every requisition.

In 1886 I was by moonlight in a camp of gypsies in the old Roman
amphitheatre near Budapest. It was a very picturesque sight, what
with the blazing fire, the strangely-dressed men, the wild shrieking,
singing, and dancing women. And when, as I have before mentioned, they
showed me the shells which they carried for amulets, they exhibited one
much larger of conch-like form, the tip of which had been removed and
to which there was attached a flexible tube. This was used in a very
remarkable trick. The shell, or one like it, is put into the hands of
the person consulting the oracle, who is directed to listen to the
voice of the Nivashi, or spirit of the air. Then he is blindfolded,
the tube applied, and through it the gypsy speaks in a trained soft
voice. Thus, in conchomanteia, the oracles still live and devotees
still hear the fairies talk.

Now, be it observed that hearing is the most deceptive of the
senses--as the reader may have seen exemplified by a lecturer,
when the audience were persuaded that he was fiddling on one cane
with another, or blowing a flute tune on one, when the music was
made by a confederate behind a screen. I myself, a few days since,
when in the Köppern Thal, verily believed I heard the murmur and
music of children's voices--when lo! it proved to be the babbling
brook. Some years ago--I forget where it happened in England, but I
guarantee the truth of what I tell--it was found that the children
in a certain village were in the habit of going to an ancient tomb
in which there was a round hole, putting their ears to it, and, as
they said, of listening to what the dead people were saying. It is
facile enough to understand that among them there would be some whose
unconscious creative faculty would lead them to literally hearing
words or songs. There is another ancient and beautiful mystical
association with shells. The conch when pierced formed a trumpet,
whose notes seemed to be allied to the murmuring of the wind and
waves heard in the shell when applied to the ear. The sea-god Triton
blew upon a shell--"meaning thereby the roaring of the waves." "And
in analogous wise a shell is represented on the Tower of the Winds
in Athens, to represent Boreas, the north-east wind, and the roaring
of the storm" (Millin, "Gallerie Mythologique"). The resemblance of
wind to the human voice has probably occurred to every human being,
and has furnished similes for every poet. That these voices should be
those of spirits is a natural following. So the last Hebrew oracle,
the Bath Kol, or Daughter of the Voice, survives in shells and lives
in gypsy-lore. And so we find in rags and patches on the garments of
Egyptian fellahin the edges of Pharaoh's garment, which in olden time
it was an honour for kings to kiss.

Deception of this kind by means of voices, apparently supernatural,
is of great antiquity. The high priest Savan the Asmunian, of Egypt,
is said to have used acoustic tubes for this purpose, and it is very
evident that the long corridors or passages in the stone temples must
have suggested it as well as whispering galleries. The Hebrew Cabalists
are believed to have made one form of the mysterious Teraphim by taking
the head of a child and so preparing it by magic ceremonies that when
interrogated it would reply. These ceremonies consisted in fact of
skilfully adjusting a phonetic tube to the head. It is very probable
that the widely-spread report of this oracle gave rise to the belief
that the Jews slaughtered and sacrificed children. "Eliphaz Levi,"
or the Abbé Constant, a writer of no weight whatever as an authority,
but not devoid of erudition, and with occasional shrewd insights, gives
it as his belief that the terrible murders of hundreds of children by
Gilles de Retz--the absurdly so-called original of Blue-beard--were
suggested by a recipe for sanguinary sorcery, drawn from some Hebrew
Cabalistical book. Nicephorus (Lib. 7 c. 33) and Cedrenus, as cited
by Grosius in his "Magica" (1597), tell us that when Constantine
was ill a number of children were collected to be slain that the
emperor might bathe in their blood (in quo si se Imperator ablueret,
certo recuperaret), and that because he was moved by the tears of
their mothers to spare their lives, was restored to health by the
saints. It seems to have escaped the attention of writers that at
the very time during the Middle Ages when the Jews were being most
bitterly persecuted for offering children at the Passover, it was
really a common thing among Christians to sacrifice children, maids,
or grown-up people, by burying them alive under the foundations of
castles, &c., to insure their stability--a ghastly sacrifice, which
in after-times took the form of walling-up a cock and finally an
egg. But from an impartial and common-sense standpoint, there could
be no difference between the sacrifice of a child by a Cabalist and
the torturing and burning witches and heretics by ecclesiastics,
unless, indeed, that the latter was the wickeder of the two, since
the babes were simply promptly killed, while the Inquisitors put
their victims to death with every refinement of mental and physical
torture. Both Cabalist and priest were simply engaged in different
forms of one and the same fetish-work which had been handed down
from the days of witchcraft. Nor did Calvin, when he burnt Servetus,
differ in anything from a Voodoo sacrificing "a goat without horns."

Punishing a heretic to please or placate the Deity differs in nothing
from killing any victim to get luck. Other sentiments may be mingled
with this "conjuring," but the true foundation of black witchcraft
(and all witchcraft is black which calls for blood, suffering,
starvation, and the sacrifice of natural instincts), is the mortar
of the fear of punishment, and the stones of the hope of reward,
the bulk of the latter being immeasurably greater than that of the
former, which is a mere Bindemittel, or means of connection.

It is remarkable that nowhere, not even in England, do the gypsies
regard the witch as utterly horrible, diabolical, and damnable. She is
with them simply a woman who has gained supernatural power, which she
uses for good or misuses for evil according to her disposition. The
witch of the Church--Catholic or Protestant--when closely examined is
a very childish conception. She sets forth personal annoyance without
any regard whatever as to whether it is really good in disguise or a
natural result of our own follies. Thus witches caused thunder-storms,
which, because they were terrifying and more or less destructive,
were seriously treated by the Church as unmitigated evils, therefore
as phenomena directly due to the devil and his servants. Theology the
omniscient did not know that storms cleared the air. Witches were
responsible for all pestilences, and very often for all disorders
of any kind--as it was very convenient for the ignorant leech to
attribute to sorcery or moral delinquency or to God, a disease which
he could not cure. For "Theology, the science of sciences," had not
as yet ascertained that plagues and black deaths, and most of the
ills of man are the results of neglect of cleanliness, temperance,
and other sanitary laws. It is only a few years since a very eminent
clergyman and president of a college in America attributed to
"Divine dispensation" the deaths of a number of students, which were
directly due to palpable neglect of proper sanitary arrangements by
the reverend gentleman himself, and his colleagues. But, admitting
the "divine dispensation," according to the mediæval theory, the
president, as the agent, must have been a "wizard"--or conjuror--a
delusion which the most superficial examination of his works would
at once dissipate. But to return--there can be no denial whatever
that according to what is admitted to be absolutely true to-day by
everybody, be he orthodox or liberal, witches, had they existed,
must have been agents of God, busied in preventing plagues instead
of causing them--by raising storms which cleared the air. Even the
Algonkin Indians knew more than the Church in this respect, for they
have a strange old legend to the effect that when the god of Storms,
Wuch-ow-sen, the giant eagle, was hindered by a magician from his
accustomed work, the sea and air grew stagnant, and people died. [24]
The witch was simply another form of the Hebrew Azrael, God's Angel
of Death.

Which may all lead to the question: If a belief in witches as utterly
evil servants of the devil could be held as an immutable dogma of
the Church and a matter of eternal truth for eternal belief--to
prove which there is no end of ingenious argument and an appalling
array of ecclesiastical authority cited in the black-letter "Liber
de Sortilegiis" of Paulus Grillandus, now lying before me (Lyons,
1547), as well as in the works of Sprenger, Bodinus, Delrio, and the
Witch-bull of Pope Innocent--and if this belief be now exploded even
among the priests, what proof have we that any of the dogmas which
went with it are absolutely and for ever true? This is the question
of dogmatik, versus development or evolution, and witchcraft is its
greatest solvent. For when people believe, or make believe, in a thing
so very much as to torture like devils and put to death hundreds
of thousands of fellow-beings, mostly helpless and poor old women,
not to mention many children, it becomes a matter of very serious
import to all humanity to determine once for all whether the system or
code according to which this was done was absolutely right for ever,
or not. For if it was true, these executions and the old theory of
witchcraft were all quite right, as the Roman Church still declares,
since the Pope has sanctioned of late years several very entertaining
works in which modern spiritualists, banjo-twangers, table-turners,
&c., are declared to be really wizards, who perform their stupendous
and appalling miracles directly by the aid of devils. And, by the way,
somebody might make an interesting work not only on the works in the
Index Librum Prohibitorum, which it entails seventy-six distinct kinds
of damnation to read, but also on those which the Pope sanctions--I
believe, blesses. Among the later of the latter is one which pretends
to prove that Jews do really still continue to sacrifice Christian
children at the Passover feast--and, for aught I know, to eat them,
fried in oil, or "buttered with goose-grease"--apropos of which, I
marvel that the Hebrews, instead of tamely denying it, do not boldly
retort on the Christians the charge of torturing their own women and
children to death as witches, which was a thousand times wickeder
than simply bleeding them with a penknife, as young Hugh of Lincoln
was said to have been disposed of by the Jew's daughter.

But people all say now--that was the age, and the Church was still
under the influence of barbarism, and so on. Exactly; but that
admission plainly knocks down and utterly destroys the whole platform
of dogmatism and the immutable and eternal truth of any dogma whatever,
for it admits evolution--and to seize on its temporary fleeting forms
and proclaim that they are immutable, is to mistake the temporal
for the eternal, the infinitesimal fraction for the whole. This is
not worshipping God, the illimitable, unknown tremendous Source of
Life, but His minor temporary forms, "essences," or "angels," as the
Cabalists termed the successive off-castings of His manifestations.


    In Being's flood, in action's storm
    I work and weave--above, beneath,
    Work and weave in endless motion
    Birth and death, an infinite ocean
        A seizing and giving
        The fire of the living.
    'Tis thus at the roaring loom of Time I ply
    And weave for God the garment thou seest Him by.


Now there are infinite numbers of these garments, but none of them
are God, though the Church declared that what they had of them were
truly Divine. So Oriental princes sent their old clothes to distant
provinces to be worshipped, as Gessler sent his hat: it is an old,
old story, and one which will be long repeated in many lands.

I have, not far back, mentioned a work on witchcraft by Paulus
Grillandus. Its full title is "Tractatus de Hereticis et sortilegiis,
omnifariam Coitio eorumque penis. Item de Questionibus et Tortura ac
de Relaxatione Carceratorum"--that is, in brief, a work on Heretics,
Witches breakers of the Seventh Commandment of all kinds, Examination
by Torture, and Imprisonment. It was a leading vade mecum, or standard
guide, in its time for lawyers and the clergy, especially the latter,
and reads as if it had come from the library of hell, and been written
by a devil, though composed, according to the preface, to promote
the dignity and glory of the Christian Church. I can well believe
that a sensitive humane person could be really maddened by a perusal
and full comprehension of all the diabolical horrors which this book
reveals, and the glimpses which it gives of what must have been endured
literally by millions of heretics and "witches," and all men or women
merely accused by anybody of any kind of "immorality," especially of
"heresy." I say suspected or accused--for either was sufficient to
subject a victim to horrible agonies until he or she confessed. What is
most revolting is the calm, icy-cold-blooded manner in which the most
awful, infernal cruelties are carefully discussed--as, for instance,
if one has already had any limbs amputated for punishment whether
further tortures may then be inflicted? It is absolutely a relief to
find that among the six kinds of persons legally exempted from the
rack, &c.--there are only six and these do not include invalids--are
pregnant women. But such touches of common humanity are rare indeed
in it. I do not exaggerate in the least when I say that the whole
spirit of this work--which faithfully reflects the whole spirit of the
"justice" of the Middle Ages--inclines in a ferocious, wolfish manner
to extend and multiply punishment of the most horrible kinds to every
small offence against the Church--to manufacture and increase crime
as if it were capital for business, and enlarge the sphere of torture
so as to create power and awe.

Nous avons changé tout cela, say the descendants of those fiends
in human form. But if it was wrong then why did you do it if you
were infallible inspired judges? And if you now believe that to be
atrocious which was once holy, and a vast portion of your whole system,
how can you say that the Church does not follow the laws of evolution
and progress--and if so, where will it stop? It is a curious reflection
that if the Pope and Cardinals of 1890 had lived four hundred years
ago they would (with the exception, perhaps, of the Spaniards) have
all been burned alive for heresy. Which is literally true.

Within a minute's walk from where I sit, and indeed visible from my
window in this town of Homburg vor der Höhe, are two round towers of
other days--grim and picturesque relics of the early Middle Ages. One
is called the Hexenthurm or Witches' Tower. In it gypsies, witches,
and heretics were confined--it was the hotel specially reserved
for them when they visited Homburg, and in its cells which are of
the smallest between walls of the thickest, I or you, reader, might
be confined to-day, but for one Martin Luther and certain laws of
evolution or progress of which Paulus Grillandus did not dream.

As I was sketching the tower, an old woman told me that there were many
strange tales about it. That I can well believe but I dare say they
are all summed up in the following ballad from the German of Heine:--


    "The Witch."

   "Folks said when my granny Eliza bewitched,
      She must die for her horrid transgression;
    Much ink from his pen the old magistrate pitched,
      But he could not extort a confession.

    And when in the kettle my granny was thrown
      She yelled 'Death' and 'Murder!' while dying;
    And when the black smoke all around us was blown,
      As a raven she rose and went flying.

    Little black grandmother, feathered so well,
      Oh, come to the tower where I'm sitting:
    Bring cakes and bring cheese to me here in the cell,
      Through the iron-barred window flitting.

    Little black grandmother, feathered and wise,
      Just give my aunt a warning,
    Lest she should come flying and pick out my eyes
      When I merrily swing in the morning."


Horst in his "Dæmonomagie," a History of the Belief in Magic, Demoniac
marvels, Witchcraft, &c., gives the picture of a Witch-tower, at
Lindheim in the Wetterau, with all its terrible history, extracted
from the town archives. It is a horrible history of torturing and
burning at the stake of innumerable women of all ages, the predominant
feature being that any accusation by anybody whatever, or any rumour
set afloat in any way, amply sufficed to bring an enemy to death,
or to rob a person who had money. Hysterical women and perverse or
eccentric children frequently originated these accusations merely to
bring themselves into notice.

There was till within a few years a Witches' Tower in Heidelberg. It
was a very picturesque structure in an out-of-the-way part of the
town, in nobody's way, and was therefore of course pulled down by the
good Philistine citizens, who have the same mania in Heidelberg as
"their ignorant-like" in London, Philadelphia, or any other town,
for removing all relics of the olden time.

In connection with sorcery and gypsies, it is worth observing that in
1834 the latter, in Swabia, or South Germany, frequently went about
among the country-people, with puppet-shows, very much of the Punch
kind, and that they had a rude drama of Faust, the great wizard,
which had nothing to do with that of Goethe. It was derived from
the early sources, and had been little by little gypsified into a
melodrama peculiar to the performers. August Zoller, in his "Bilder
aus Schwaben" (Stuttgard, 1834), gives the following description of
it. The book has a place in all Faust libraries, and has been kept
alive by this single passage:--


   "There is a blast of a trumpet, and the voice of a man proclaims
    behind the scenes that the play is to begin. The curtain is drawn,
    and Faust leaning against the background--which represents a
    city--soliloquizes:

  "'I am the cleverest doctor in the world, but all my cleverness
    does not help me to make the beautiful princess love me. I will
    call up Satan from the under-world to aid me in my plans to win
    her. Devil--I call thee!'

   "Meanwhile Faust's servant--the funny man--has entered and amused
    the public with comical gestures. The appearance of the devil is
    announced by a firework (Sprühteufel) fizzing and cracking. He
    descends from the air, there being no arrangements for his coming
    up. The servant bursts into a peal of laughter, and the devil asks:

  "'Faust thou hast called me; now, what is thy wish?'

  "'I love the lovely princess--canst thou make her love me?'

  "'Nothing is easier. Cut thy finger and sign to me thy life;
    then all my devilish art will be at thy service till thou hast
    committed four murders.'

   "Faust and the devil fly forth, the servant making sarcastic
    remarks as to the folly of his master, and the curtain falls.

   "In the second act the fair princess enters--she is three times as
    large as Faust, but bewails his absence in a plaintive voice and
    departs. Faust enters and calls for a Furio who shall carry him
    to Mantua. Enter three Furios (witches) who boast their power. 'I
    can carry you as swiftly as a moor-cock flies,' says one. This is
    not swift enough for Faust. 'I fly as fast as bullet from a gun,'
    says the second. The master answers:

  "'A right good pace, but not enough for Faust.' To the third:
   'How fast art thou?'

  "'As quick as Thought.'

  "'That will suffice--there's naught so swift as Thought. Bear me
    to Mantua, to her I love, the princess of my heart!'

   "The Furio takes Faust on her back, and they fly through the
    air. The servant makes, as before, critical and sarcastic remarks
    on what has passed, and the curtain falls.

   "In the third act the devil persuades Faust to murder his father,
    so as to inherit his treasures, 'for the old man has a tough
    life.' In the fourth, maddened by jealousy, he stabs the princess
    and her supposed lover. The small sarcastic servant takes the
    murdered pair by the legs, and drags them about, cracking jokes,
    and giving the corpses cuffs on their ears to bring them again
    to life.

   "In the fifth act, the clock strikes eleven. Faust has now filled
    to the brim the measure of his iniquity. The devil appears,
    proves to him that it is time to depart; it strikes twelve; the
    smoke of a fizzling squib and several diabolical fire-crackers
    fills the air, and Faust is carried away, while the small servant,
    as satanical and self-possessed as ever, makes his jokes on the
    folly of Faust--and the curtain falls."


This is the true Faust drama of the Middle Ages, with the
ante-Shakespearian blending of tragedy and ribald fun. But this same
mixture is found to perfection in the early Indian drama--for instance,
in "Sakuntala"--and it would be indeed a very curious thing should
it be discovered that the gypsies, who were in all ages small actors
and showmen of small plays, had brought from the East some rude drama
of a sorcerer, who is in the end cheated by his fiend. Such is, in
a measure, the plot of the Baital Pachisi or Vikram and the Vampire,
which is borrowed from or founded on old traditions, and the gypsies,
from their familiarity with magic, and as practical actors, would,
in all probability, have a Faust play of some kind, according to the
laws of cause and effect. In any case the suggestion may be of value
to some investigator.

Gypsies in England--that is those "of the old sort"--regard a
shoe-string as a kind of amulet or protection. Many think it is
unlucky to have one's photograph taken, but no harm can come of it
if the one who receives the picture gives the subject a shoe-string
or a pair of laces.

Dr. F. S. Krauss in his curious work, "Sreca, or Fortune and Fate in
the popular belief of the South Slavonians" (Vienna, 1886), draws
a line of distinction between the fetish and amulet. "The fetish,"
he declares, "has virtue from being the dwelling of a protecting
spirit. The amulet, however, is only a symbol of a higher power,"
that is of a power whose attention is drawn by or through it to
the believer or wearer. This, however, like the distinction between
idolatry and worshipping images as symbols of higher beings, becomes
in the minds of the multitude (and for that matter, in all minds),
a distinction without a dot of difference. The amulet may "rest upon
a higher range of ideas, while the fetish stands on its own feet,"
but if both are regarded as bringing luck and if, for instance, one
rosary or image of the same person is believed to bring more luck
than another, it is a fetish and nothing else. An amulet may pretend
to be a genteeler kind of fetish, but they are all of the same family.

The gypsies prepare among the Bosniacs, "on the high plains of Malwan,"
a fetish in the form of a cradle made of nine kinds of wood, to bring
luck to the child who sleeps in it. But Dr. Krauss falls, I presume,
into a very great error, when he attributes to her Majesty the Queen
of England a belief in fetish, on the strength of the following
remarkable passage from the Wiener Allgemeine Zeitung:--


   "By command of Queen Victoria, Mr. Martin, Director of the
    Institute for the Blind, has attended to the making a cradle for
    the newly-born child of the Princess of Battenberg. The cradle
    is to be made entirely by blind men and women. The Queen firmly
    believes that objects made by blind people bring luck."


Truly, if anything could bring luck it ought to be something ordered
with a kind and charitable view from poor and suffering people,
but it is rather hard to promptly conclude that her Majesty believes
in fetish because she benevolently ordered a cradle from the blind,
and that she had no higher motive than to get something which would
bring luck to her grandchild.

It may be observed in connection with this superstition that among
the Hungarian gypsies several spells depend on using different kinds
of wood, and that four are said to have been taken for the true cross.

Gypsies, in common with the rest of the "fetishioners" of all the
world, believe in the virtue of a child's caul. Dr. Krauss found in
Kobas on the Save an amulet which contained such a caul with garlic
and four-leaved clover. This must have been a very strong charm indeed,
particularly if the garlic was fresh.

Another very great magic protector in every country among gypsies
as well as Gentiles, is the thunderbolt, known in Germany as the
Donneraxt, Donnerstein, Donnerkeil, Albschoss, Strahlstein, and
Teufelsfinger. It was called by the Greeks Astropelákia, by the Latins
Gemma cerauniæ, by the Spaniards Piedras de rayo, by the dwellers
in the French High Alps Peyras del tron (pierres de tonerre), by the
Birmans Mogio (the child of lightning), by the Chinese Rai-fu-seki (the
battle-axe of Tengu, the guardian of Heaven), by the Hindoos Swayamphu,
or "the self-originated." Dr. Krauss, from whom I have taken these
remarks, adds that in America and Australia it is also regarded as
a charm protective and luck-bringing. But here there is a confusion
of objects. The thunderbolt described by Dr. Krauss is, I believe,
a petrified shell, a kind of mucro or belemnite. The thunderbolt
of the Red Indians really resembles it, but is entirely different
in its nature. The latter results from lightning entering the sand
fusing it. It sometimes makes in this way a very long tube or rod,
with a point. People, finding these, naturally believed that they
were thunderbolts. I knew an old Penobscot Indian who, seeing the
lightning strike the earth, searched and found such a thunderbolt,
which he greatly prized. In process of time people who found mucrones
in rocks believed them to be the same as the glass-like points of
fused sand which they so much resembled.

The so-called thunderbolt is confused with the prehistoric stone
axe, both bearing the same name in many lands. As this axe is
often also a hammer it is evident that it may have been sacred to
Thor. "The South Slavonian"--or gypsy--"does not distinguish," says
Dr. Krauss, "between the thunderbolt and prehistoric axe. He calls
both strelica." The possession of one brings luck and prosperity in
all business, but it must be constantly carried on the person. Among
the "thirties" there lived in Gaj in Slavonia a poor Jewish peddler
named David. Once he found a strelica. He always carried it about
with him. The peasants envied him greatly its possession. They came
to him in the market-place and cried, "Al si sretan, Davide!" ("Ha,
how lucky thou art, David!") The Slavonian Jews called him, for a joke,
"Strelica."

The prehistoric axe was probably regarded as gifted with fetish power,
even in the earliest age, especially when it was made of certain
rare materials. Thus among the Red Indians of Massachusetts stone
"tomahawks" of veined, petrified wood were specially consecrated
to burial-places, while in Europe axe-heads of jade were the
most coveted of possessions. A. B. Meyer has written a large work,
"Jade und Nephrit Objecte aus dem Ethnographische Museum zu Dresden,
America und Europe" (Leipzig, 1882). It has always been supposed that
the objects of true jade came only from Tartary, and I believe that
I was the first person to discover that it existed in quantities in
Western Europe. The history of this "finding" is not without interest.

It has been usual--it is said for a thousand years--for pilgrims to
Iona to bring away with them as souvenirs a few green pebbles of
a peculiar kind, and to this day, as every tourist will remember,
the children who come to the steamboat offer handsful of them
for sale. When I was there many years ago--in Iona--I also went
away with perhaps twenty of them. One evening, after returning to
London, there were at my home three Chinese gentlemen attached to the
Legation. The conversation turned on Buddhist pilgrimages and Fusang,
and the question, founded on passages in the Chinese annals, as to
whether certain monks had really passed from the Celestial Kingdom to
Mexico in the fifth century and returned. This reminded me of Iona,
and I produced my green pebbles, and told what I knew about them.

My visitors regarded the stones with great interest and held
an animated conversation over them in Chinese, which I did not
understand. Observing this I made them presents of the pebbles, and
was thanked with an earnestness which seemed to me to be out of all
proportion to the value of the gifts. Thinking this over the next
day, I wrote to the clergyman at Iona asking him to be so kind as to
send me some of the pebbles, and offering to pay for them. He did so,
sending me by mail a box of the stones. Two or three were very pretty,
one especially. It is of a dark green colour and slightly transparent.

Two years after, when in Philadelphia, meeting with an old friend,
Dr. Joseph Leidy, well known as a man of science, and, inter alia, as
a mineralogist. I showed him my pebble and asked him what it was. He
replied, "It is jade." To my query whether it might not be nephrite
he answered no, that it was true jade of fine quality.

Jade is in China a talismanic stone, many occult virtues and
luck-bringing qualities being ascribed to it. It is very curious,
and possibly something more than a mere chance coincidence, that
the green pebbles of Iona were also carried as charms. It would be
remarkable if even in prehistoric times, or in the stone age, Iona
and Tartary had been connected by superstition and tradition.

Among the gypsies as well as Christians in Servia, nuts, especially
those which are heart-shaped (i.e., double), are carried as fetishes
or amulets. In very early times a nut, as containing like a seed
the principle of germination and self-reproduction, was typical of
life. Being enclosed in a shell it seemed to be in a casket or box
which was of itself a mystical symbol. Hence nuts are often found in
ancient graves. There are many stories accordingly in all countries in
which a nut or egg is represented as being connected with the life of
some particular being or person. The ogre in several tales can live
until a certain egg is broken. In the Graubunden or Grisons there is
the following legend:--


   "Once there lived near Fideriseau a rich peasant. To him came a
    poor beggar, who asked for alms in vain. Then the man replied,
    'If thou wilt give me nothing yet will I give thee something. Thou
    shalt keep thy treasure and also thy daughter after thee; yea,
    and for years after she is dead her spirit shall know no rest for
    taking care of it. But I give thee this nut. Plant it by yonder
    great stone, thou stony-hearted fool. From the nut will grow a
    tree, and from the tree twigs from which a cradle will be made in
    which a child will be rocked who will redeem thy daughter from
    her penance.' And after the girl died, a spirit of a pale woman
    with dark hair was seen flying nightly near Fideris, and that
    for many years, for it takes a long time for an acorn to grow up
    into an oak. But as she is no longer seen it is believed that the
    cradle has been made and the child born who became the deliverer."


A. B. Elysseeff, in his very interesting article based on Kounavine's
"Materials for the Study of the Gypsies," gives the representation
of four gypsy amulets, also "a cabalistic token" that brings good
luck to its wearer.


   "The amulets," writes M. Elysseeff, "are made of wrought iron
    and belong to M. Kounavine. The cabalistic sign is designed"
    (copied?) "by ourselves, thanks to the amiability of a gypsy
    djecmas (sorcerer) of the province of Novogorod. The amulet A was
    found by M. Kounavine among the gypsies who roam with their camps
    in the Ural neighbourhood; some Bessarabian gypsies supplied B;
    C was obtained from a gypsy sorcerer of the Persian frontier,
    and D formed a part of some ornaments placed with their dead by
    gypsies of Southern Russia.

   "The cabalistic sign" (vide illustration at head of chapter)
   "represents roughly a serpent, the symbol of Auromori, the evil
    principle in gypsy mythology. The figure of an arch surrounded
    with stars is, according to M. Kounavine, held by the gypsies as
    symbolizing the earth, the meaning of the triangle &#x25B3; is not
    known. The moon and stars which surround the earth and which are,
    so to speak, enclosed in the serpent's coils, symbolize the world
    lying in evil. This sign is engraved by gypsies upon the plates of
    the harness of the horses, of garments, and as designed ornaments."


It may be here remarked that the symbolism of M. Kounavine, while
it may be quite accurate, must be taken with great reserve. If the
"arch" be simply a horse-shoe, all these ornaments, except the serpent,
may be commonly found on the trappings of London dray-horses.


   "Amulet A, which also represents the sun, the moon, the stars,
    earth, and a serpent, can equally serve as a symbol of the
    universe. According to M. Kounavine, Ononi" (the Ammon of the
    Egyptians) "and Auromori, are symbolized upon this amulet. Amulet
    B represents a man surrounded by a halo, aided by the moon and the
    stars, and armed with a sword and arrows. Beneath is represented
    the horse; the serpent symbolizes Auromori. As a whole this amulet
    represents the conflict between the good and evil principle,
    Jandra (Indra) against Auromori.

   "Amulet C represents a gleaming star and the serpent, and is
    called Baramy (Brama), symbolizing, according to M. Kounavine,
    the gypsy proto-divinity.

   "Or amulet D, which represents a flaming pyre and some
    hieroglyphics, may also symbolize the prayer addressed to the
    divinity of the fire."


If these explanations were given by gypsy sorcerers the amulets are
indeed very curious. But, abstractly, the serpent, arrows, stars,
the moon, an archer, a fox, and a plant, occur, all the world over,
on coins or in popular art, with or without symbolism, and I confess
that I should have expected something very different as illustrating
such a remarkable mythology as that given by M. Kounavine. However, the
art of a nation--as, for instance, that of the Algonkin Indians--may
be very far indeed behind its myths and mental conceptions.








CHAPTER XVI.

GYPSIES, TOADS, AND TOAD-LORE.


                   "I went to the toad that lies under the wall,
                    I charmed him out, and he came at my call."

                                      ("Masque of Queens," Ben Johnson.)


The toad plays a prominent part in gypsy (as in other) witchcraft,
which it may well do, since in most Romany dialects there is the same
word for a toad or frog and the devil. Paspati declares that the toad
suggested Satan, but I incline to think that there is some as yet
undiscovered Aryan word, such as beng, for the devil, and that the
German Bengel, a rascal, is a descendant from it. However, gypsies
and toads are "near allied and that not wide" from one another,
and sometimes their children have them for pets, which recalls the
statements made in the celebrated witch trials in Sweden, where it was
said by those who professed to have been at the Blockula, or Sabbat,
that the little witch children were set to play at being shepherds,
their flocks being of toads.

I have been informed by gypsies that toads do really form unaccountable
predilections for persons and places. The following is accurately
related as it was told me in Romany fourteen years ago, in Epping
Forest, by a girl. "You know, sir, that people who live out of
doors all the time, as we do, see and know a great deal about such
creatures. One day we went to a farmhouse, and found the wife almost
dying because she thought she was bewitched by a woman who came
every day in the form of a great toad to her door and looked in. And,
sure enough, while she was talking the toad came, and the woman was
taken in such a way with fright that I thought she'd have died. But
I had a laugh to myself; for I knew that toads have such ways, and
can not only be tamed, but will almost tame themselves. So we gypsies
talked together in Romany, and then said we could remove the spell if
she would get us a pair of shears and a cup of salt. Then we caught
the toad, and tied the shears so as to make a cross--you see!--and
with it threw the toad into the fire, and poured the salt on it. So
the witchcraft was ended, and the lady gave us a good meal and ten
shillings." (For a Romany poem on this incident vide "English Gypsy
Songs," Trübner and Co., 1875). And there is a terrible tale told by
R. H. Stoddard, in a poem, that one day a gentleman accidentally trod
on a toad and killed it. Hearing a scream at that instant in the woods
at a little distance, followed by an outcry, he went to see what was
the matter, and found a gypsy camp where they were lamenting the sudden
death of a child. On looking at the corpse he was horrified to observe
that it presented every appearance of having been trampled to death,
its wounds being the same as those he had inflicted on the toad. This
story being told by me to the gypsy girl, she in no wise doubted its
truth, being in fact greatly horrified at it; but was amazed at the
child chovihani, or witch, being in two places at once.

In the Spanish Association of Witches in the year 1610 (vide Lorent,
"Histoire de l'Inquisition") the toad played a great part. One who had
taken his degrees in this Order testified that, on admission, a mark
like a toad was stamped on his eyelid, and that a real toad was given
to him which had the power to make its master invisible, to transport
him to distant places, and change him to the form of many kinds of
animals. There is a German interjection or curse "Kroten-düvel!" or
"toad-devil," which is supposed to have originated as follows: When
the Emperor Charlemagne came into the country of the East Saxons and
asked them whom they worshipped they replied, "Krodo is our god;" to
which the Emperor replied "Krodo is all the same as Kroten-düvel!" "And
he made them pay bitterly by the sword and the rope for the crime of
calling God, according to their language, by a name different from that
which he used; for he put many thousands of them to death, like King
Olof of Norway, to show that his faith was one of meekness and mercy."

It is bad to have one's looks against one. The personal appearance of
the toad is such as to have given it a bad place in the mythology of
all races. The Algonkin Indians--who, like Napoleon and Slawkenbergius,
were great admirers of men with fine bold noses--after having studied
the plane physiognomy of the toad, decided that it indicated all the
vices, and made of the creature the mother of all the witches. Nothing
could have been more condemnatory; since in their religion--as in that
of the Accadians, Laps, and Eskimo--a dark and horrible sorcery, in
which witches conciliated evil spirits, was believed to have preceded
their own nobler Shamanism, by which these enemies of mankind were
forced or conquered by magic. Once the Great Toad had, as she thought,
succeeded in organizing a conspiracy by which Glooskap, the Shamanic
god of Nature, was to be destroyed. Then he passed his hand over her
face and that of her fellow-conspirator the Porcupine; and from that
time forth their noses were flat, to the great scorn of all honest
well-beaked Indians.

The old Persians made the toad the symbol and pet of Ahriman, the
foe of light, and declared that his Charfester, or attendant demons,
took that form when they persecuted Ormuzd. Among the Tyrolese it
is a type of envy; whence the proverb, "Envious as a toad." In the
Middle Ages, among artists and in many Church legends, it appears
as Greed or Avarice: there is even to this day, in some mysterious
place on the right bank of the Rhine between Laufenberg and Binzgau,
a pile of coals on which sits a toad. That is to say, coals they
seem to the world. But the pile is all pure gold, and the toad is a
devil who guards it; and he who knows how can pronounce a spell which
shall ban the grim guardian. And there is a story told by Menzel
("Christliche Symbolik," vol. i. p. 530), that long ago there lived
in Cologne a wicked miser, who when old repented and wished to leave
his money to the poor. But when he opened his great iron chest, he
found that every coin in it had turned to a horrible toad with sharp
teeth. This story being told to his confessor, the priest saw in
it divine retribution, and told him that God would have none of his
money--nay, that it would go hard with him to save his soul. And he,
being willing to do anything to be free of sin, was locked up in the
chest with the toads; and lo! the next day when it was opened the
creatures had eaten him up. Only his clean-picked bones remained.

But in the Tyrol it is believed that the toads are themselves poor
sinners, undergoing penance as Hoetschen or Hoppinen--as they are
locally called--for deeds done in human form. Therefore, they are
regarded with pity and sympathy by all good Christians. And it is
well known that in the Church of Saint Michael in Schwatz, on the
evening before the great festivals, but when no one is present, an
immense toad comes crawling before the altar, where it kneels and
prays, weeping bitterly. The general belief is that toads are for
the most part people who made vows to go on pilgrimages, and died
with the vows unfulfilled. So the poor creatures go hopping about
astray, bewildered and perplexed, striving to find their way to
shrines which have perchance long since ceased to exist. Once there
was a toad who took seven years to go from Leifers to Weissenstein;
and when the creature reached the church it suddenly changed to a
resplendent white dove, which, flying up to heaven, vanished before
the eyes of a large company there assembled, who bore witness to the
miracle. And one day as a wagoner was going from Innsbruck to Seefeld,
as he paused by the wayside a toad came hopping up and seemed to be
desirous of getting into the wagon; which he, being a benevolent man,
helped it to do, and gave it a place on the seat beside him. There
it sat like any other respectable passenger, until they came to the
side-path which leads to the church of Seefeld; when, wonderful to
relate! the toad suddenly turned to a maiden of angelic beauty clad
in white, who, thanking the wagoner for his kindness to her when she
was but a poor reptile, told him that she had once been a young lady
who had vowed a pilgrimage to the church of Seefeld.

In common with the frog, the toad is an emblem of productiveness,
and ranks among creatures which are types of erotic passion. I
have in my possession a necklace of rudely made silver toads, of
Arab workmanship, intended to be worn by women who wish to become
mothers. Therefore the creature, in the Old World as well as in
the New, appears as a being earnestly seeking the companionship of
men. Thus it happened to a youth of Aramsach, near Kattenberg, that,
being one day in a lonely place by a lake, there looked up at him
from the water a being somewhat like a maid but more like a hideous
toad, with whom he entered into conversation; which became at last
friendly and agreeable, for the strange creature talked exceeding
well. Then she, thinking he might be hungry, asked him if he would
fain have anything in particular to eat. He mentioned in jest a kind
of cakes; whereupon, diving into the lake, she brought some up, which
he ate. So he met her many times; and whenever he wished for anything,
no matter what, she got it for him from the waters: the end of it all
being that, despite her appalling ugliness, the youth fell in love
with her and offered marriage, to which she joyfully consented. But
no sooner had the ceremony been performed than she changed to a lady
of wonderful beauty; and, taking him by the hand, she conducted him
to the lake, into which she led him, and "in this life they were seen
never more." This legend evidently belongs to frog-lore. According to
one version, the toad after marriage goes to a lake, washes away her
ugliness, and returns as a beauty with the bridegroom to his castle,
where they live in perfect happiness.

I have also a very old silver ring, in which there is set a toad
rudely yet artistically carved in hæmatite, or blood-stone. These
were famous amulets until within two or three hundred years.

If you are a gypsy and have a tame toad it is a great assistance in
telling fortunes, and brings luck--that commodity which, as Callot
observed, the gypsies are always selling to everybody while they
protest they themselves have none. As I tested with the last old gypsy
woman whom I met: "What bak the divvus?"--"What luck to-day?" "Kekker
rya"--"None, sir," was the reply, as usual, "I never have any luck." So
like a mirror they reflect all things save themselves, and show you
what they know not.


   "I've seen you where you never were
      And where you never will be;
    And yet within that very place
      You can be seen by me.
    For to tell what they do not know
      Is the art of the Romany."








NOTES


[1] I was once myself made to contribute, involuntarily, to this kind
of literature. Forty years ago I published a Folk-lore bock entitled
"The Poetry and Mystery of Dreams," in which the explanations of
dreams, as given by Astrampsychius, Artemidorus, and other ancient
oneirologists, were illustrated by passages from many poets and popular
ballads, showing how widely the ancient symbolism had extended. A
few years ago I found that some ingenious literary hack had taken my
work (without credit), and, omitting what would not be understood by
servant girls, had made of it a common sixpenny dream-book.

[2] Vide an extremely interesting paper on "The Origin of Languages
and the Antiquity of Speaking Man," by Horatio Hale. ["Proceedings of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science," vol. xxv.] As
I had, owing to studies for many years of baby-talk and jargons, long
ago arrived at Mr. Hale's conclusions, I was astonished to learn that
they have been so recently formed by anybody.

[3] Vide "Practical Education," by C. G. Leland (London: Whittaker
and Co., 1888), in which this faculty is fully discussed, pp. 184-213.

[4] "It is said that if the bones of a green frog which has been eaten
by ants are taken, those on the left side will provoke hatred, and
those on the right side excite love" ("Div. Cur.," c. 23).... "One
species of frog called rubeta, because it lives among brambles, is
said to have wonderful powers. Brought into an assembly of people it
imposes silence. If the little bone in its right side be thrown into
boiling water it chills it at once. It excites love when put into a
draught" ("Castle Saint Angelo and the Evil Eye," by W. W. Story).

[5] According to Pliny, the tooth of a wolf hung to the neck
of an infant was believed to be an efficient amulet against
disease; and a child's tooth caught before it falls to the
ground and set in a bracelet was considered to be beneficial to
women. Nat. Hist. lib. xxvi., cap. 10 ("Castle Saint Angelo and the
Evil Eye," by W. W. Story).

[6] This cannot fail to remind many readers of the land--

       "Where the cock never crew,
        Where the sun never shone and the wind never blew."

[7] Of the seventh son, Pipernus remarks in his book, "De Effectibus
Magicis" (1647): "Est ne sanandi superstitiosus modus eorum, qui orti
sunt die Parasceves, et quotquot nullo foemines sexu intercedente,
ac ab ortu septimi masculi legitimo thoro sunt nati? memorat Vairus,
I. de fascinatione, II. Del Rius, lib. i., part 21. Garzonius nel
Serraglio. J. Cæsar Baricellus secundus scriptor in hort. genialé."

[8] "Über Marcellus Burdigalensis, von Jacob Grimm. Gelesen in der
Academie der Wissenschaften," 28 Juni, 1847 (Berlin. Dummler). In
this work, as well as in the German Mythology, by the same author,
and in Rudolf Roth's "Litteratur und Geschichte des Veda" (Stuttgart,
1846), the reader will find, as also in the works of the elder Cato
and Pliny, numbers of these incantations.

[9] The divination by the running brook has been known in other
lands. The Highlanders when they consulted an oracle took their seer,
wrapped him in the hide of a newly-killed ox or sheep, and left him
in some wild ravine by a roaring torrent to pass the night. From such
sights and sounds there resulted impressions which were reflected
in his dreams (Vide Scott, "Lady of the Lake," and notes). The fact
that running water often makes sounds like the human voice has been
observed by the Algonkin Indians of Maine and Nova Scotia (Vide
"The Algonkin Legends of New England," by Charles G. Leland).

[10] "Südslavische Hexensagen, Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen
Gesellschaft in Wien." xiv. Bande, 1884. "Medizinische Zaubersprüche
aus Slavonien, Bosnien, der Hercegovina und Dalmatien." Wien,
1887. "Sreca, Glück und Schicksal im Volksglauben der Südslaven." Wien,
1886. "Südslavische Pestsagen." Wien, 1883.

[11] "Witch. Mediæval English wicche, both masculine and feminine, a
wizard, a witch. Anglo-Saxon wicca, masculine, wicce, feminine. Wicca
is a corruption of wítga, commonly used as a short form of witega,
a prophet, seer, magician, or sorcerer. Anglo-Saxon witan, to see,
allied to wítan, to know. Similarly Icelandic vitki, a wizard, is
from vita, to know. Wizard, Norman-French wischard, the original
Old French being guiscart, sagacious. Icelandic, vizkr, clever or
knowing, ... with French suffix ard as German hart, hard, strong"
(Skeat, "Etymol. Dictionary"). That is wiz-ard, very wise. Wit and
wisdom here are near allied to witchcraft, and thin partitions do
the bounds divide.

[12] For a very interesting account of the mysterious early
dwarfs of Great Britain the reader may consult "Earth Houses and
their Inhabitants," by David MacRitchie, in "The Testimony of
Tradition." London: Trübner and Co., 1890.

[13] The many superstitions relating to cutting nails may be referred
in part to the very wild legend of the ship Naglfara given in
Sturleson's "Edda."

"Then in that Twilight of the Gods (the Norse Day of Judgment)
will come the ship Naglfara, which is made of dead men's nails. In
that sea it will go forth. Hrymer steereth it. And for this cause
no man should die with his nails unshorn, for so the ship is made,
and the gods would fain put that off as long as possible" ("Edda,
Gylfesgynning," 26th tale).

[14] "Geit suer Heidrun heitr stendr uppi a Valholl.... En or spenum
hennar rennr moilk ... tháer ero sva miklar at allir einheria verda
fuldrucknir af." ("A ewe named Heidrun stands up in Valhalla. And
from her udders runs milk; there is so much that all the heroes may
drink their fill of it"). (Snorro Sturleson's "Edda," 20th tale).

[15] Though not connected with this work, I cannot help observing
that this extraordinary simile probably originated in a very common
ornament used as a figure-head, or in decorations, on Mississippi
steamboats, as well as ships. This is the sea-horse (hippocampus),
which may be often seen of large size, carved and gilt. Its fish tail
might be easily confused with that of an alligator. Prætorius (1666)
enumerates, among other monsters, the horse-crocodile.

[16] Schott, "Wallachische Mährchen," p. 297. Stuttgart, 1845.

[17] In Northern Sagas it appeared that Berserkers, or desperate
warriors, frequently bound themselves together in companies of
twelve. Vide the Hervor Saga, Olaf Tryggvason's and the Gautrek
Saga. So there were the twelve Norse gods and the twelve apostles.

[18] Vide "Drawing and Designing." London: Whittaker & Co., 1888.

[19] This was written long before I heard that the same idea had
occurred to others.

[20] Another Italian was fined or imprisoned for the same thing in
London in July, 1890--i.e., for telling penny fortunes by the same
machine.

[21] This chapter is reproduced, but with much addition, from one
in my work entitled "The Gypsies," published in Boston, 1881, by
Houghton and Mifflin. London: Trübner & Co. The addition will be the
most interesting portion to the folk-lorist.

[22] This song which, with its air, is very old in the United States,
has been vulgarized by being turned into a ballad of ten little nigger
boys. It is given in Mrs. Valentine's Nursery Rhymes as "Indian boys."

[23] It is not generally known that Sir H. A. Layard and Sir William
Drake were the true revivers of the glass manufacture of Venice.

[24] See the "Algonkin Legends of New England," by Charles G. Leland.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by 
Charles Godfrey Leland

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GYPSY SORCERY AND FORTUNE TELLING ***

***** This file should be named 58465-8.txt or 58465-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/4/6/58465/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
Gutenberg (This file was produced from images generously
made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
 are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook, Sexual Life of Primitive People, by Hans
Fehlinger, Translated by S. Herbert and Mrs. S. Herbert


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Sexual Life of Primitive People


Author: Hans Fehlinger



Release Date: December 15, 2018  [eBook #58475]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEXUAL LIFE OF PRIMITIVE PEOPLE***


E-text prepared by deaurider, Martin Pettit, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made
available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/B20442208


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Text enclosed by plus signs is in bold face (+bold+).





SEXUAL LIFE OF PRIMITIVE PEOPLE


      *      *      *      *      *      *

BY S. HERBERT, M.D., M.R.C.S., I.R.C.P.


+AN INTRODUCTION TO THE PHYSIOLOGY AND PSYCHOLOGY OF SEX.+

Large Crown 8vo.      Illustrated.      Price +7/6+ net.


+FUNDAMENTALS IN SEXUAL ETHICS.+

An Enquiry into Modern Tendencies.

Large Crown 8vo.      Price +12/6+ net.


+FIRST PRINCIPLES OF HEREDITY.+

Second Edition. Containing 75 Illustrations.

Large Crown 8vo.      Price +7/6+ net.


+FIRST PRINCIPLES OF EVOLUTION.+

Second Edition. Containing 90 Illustrations,
Diagrams and Tables.

Large Crown 8vo.      Price +12/6+ net.


BY MRS. S. HERBERT.

+SEX LORE.+

A Primer on Courtship, Marriage and Parenthood.
Containing 55 Illustrations.

Large Crown 8vo.      Price +7/6+ net.


BY MRS. HAVELOCK ELLIS.

+THE NEW HORIZON IN LOVE AND LIFE.+

With a Preface by Edward Carpenter and an
Introduction by Marguerite Tracy.

Large Crown 8vo.      Price +10/6+ net.


PUBLISHED BY A. & C. BLACK, LTD.,
4, 5 & 6 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W. 1.


AGENTS

AMERICA          THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                   64 & 66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK

AUSTRALASIA      THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
                   205 FLINDERS LANE, MELBOURNE

CANADA           THE MACMILLAN COMPANY OF CANADA, LTD.
                   ST. MARTIN'S HOUSE, 70 BOND STREET TORONTO

INDIA            MACMILLAN & COMPANY, LTD.
                   MACMILLAN BUILDING, BOMBAY
                   309 BOW BAZAAR STREET, CALCUTTA

      *      *      *      *      *      *


SEXUAL LIFE
OF
PRIMITIVE PEOPLE

by

H. FEHLINGER

Translated by S. Herbert, M.D., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.
Author of "An Introduction to the Physiology and
Psychology of Sex," "Fundamentals in Sexual Ethics," etc.
and
Mrs. S. Herbert,
Author of "Sex Lore."






A. & C. Black, Ltd.
4, 5 & 6 Soho Square, London, W. 1
1921




PREFACE


To most lay people the established order of sex relationships and
marriage seems something so self-evident and stable that they cannot
conceive the possibility of a variation in the established order. Yet
here, as in all things, the law of evolution applies. Our sexual system
is the outcome of a long continuous series of changes beginning with the
very dawn of human history. To understand the modern sex problem rightly
it is essential to know its origin and gradual development.

Most of the material about the sex life of primitive people is
inaccessible to the ordinary reader, being hidden away in learned
treatises and ponderous scientific works. The translators are,
therefore, glad to have found in Fehlinger's book a short comprehensive
outline of the subject, which may serve as a convenient introduction.

S. H.
F. H.

MANCHESTER,
_July, 1921_.




CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                          PAGE
   I. MODESTY AMONG PRIMITIVE PEOPLE                1

  II. PRE-MARITAL FREEDOM AND CONJUGAL FIDELITY    13

 III. COURTSHIP CUSTOMS                            34

  IV. MARRIAGE                                     46

   V. BIRTH AND FETICIDE                           76

  VI. IGNORANCE OF THE PROCESS OF GENERATION       93

 VII. MUTILATION OF THE SEX ORGANS                103

VIII. MATURITY AND DECLINE                        119

  IX. BIBLIOGRAPHY                                128




SEXUAL LIFE OF PRIMITIVE PEOPLE




I

MODESTY AMONG PRIMITIVE PEOPLE


In cold and temperate climates, it is necessary to clothe the body as a
protection against cold. In hot parts of the world, the need for
protection against the effects of the weather by means of clothing
disappears, and therefore in those regions primitive people go about
naked. It is only when they come under the influence of foreign
civilisation that they put on clothing. It is erroneous to assume that
clothing came into use because of an inborn sexual modesty. In
Australia, in the Indonesian and Melanesian islands, in tropical Africa,
and in South America, there are still many peoples that go about naked.
It is true that many of them cover their sex organs; but the
contrivances used for this purpose are not in reality intended to hide
the sex region, though to our mind they seem to do so.

Primitive people do not cover their bodies out of modesty; "the
sinfulness of nakedness" is unknown to them. Karl von den Steinen (pp.
190, 191) says that the naked Indian tribes of the Xingu region of
Brazil know no secret parts of the body. "They joke about these parts in
words and pictures quite unabashed, so that it would be foolish to call
them indecent. They are envious of our clothing, as of some precious
finery; they put it on and wear it in our presence with a complete
disregard of the simplest rules of our own society, and in complete
ignorance of its purpose. This proves that they still possess the
pristine guilelessness of Adam and Eve in Eden. Some of them celebrate
the advent of puberty in members of both sexes by noisy festivals, when
the 'private parts' come in for a good deal of general attention. If a
man wishes to inform a stranger that he is a father, or a woman that she
is a mother, they gravely denote the fact by touching the organs from
which life springs, in a most spontaneous and natural manner. It is,
therefore, not possible to understand these people properly unless we
put aside our conception of 'clothing,' and take them and their manners
in their own natural way."

The absence of sexual modesty in our sense also struck von Steinen when
questions about words arose. If he asked about a word which to our minds
might give cause for shame, the reply was given without hesitation or
any semblance of shame. Nevertheless, conversations about sexual
subjects gave the Indians, men and women, decided pleasure; but their
merry laughter was "neither impudent, nor did it give the impression of
hiding an inward embarrassment. It had, however, a slightly erotic tone,
and resembled the laughter aroused by the jokes in our own
spinning-rooms, by games of forfeits, and by other harmless jokes
exchanged in intercourse between the sexes, although the occasions and
accompanying circumstances must be so very different among truly
primitive people."

Naked savages are, however, not devoid of sexual modesty. It shows
itself immediately when any remark addressed to them can be construed as
an invitation to sexual intercourse, or when coarse jokes are made about
sexual subjects. This is clearly shown in an account by Koch-Grünberg
(I., p. 307). His European companion wanted to perform a kind of stomach
dance before some savage Indians of the Upper Rio Negro, such as is
danced in places of ill repute in Brazilian towns. The very indecent
movements of the dancer caused the women and girls to retire shyly. The
European in his attempt to "entertain" the company failed completely.
Yet one can converse quietly with these Indians on all sexual subjects
so long as they are natural; it is only obscenity that shocks them.

According to Eylmann, the Australians, at least the men, show no modesty
in sex matters, though they are by no means devoid of it in other
respects. Thus, _e.g._, they are ashamed of any mutilation of their
bodies. Young men do not cover their sex organs, but the old ones do
so, because they seem to be aware that this part of the body, of which
they were once so proud, bears signs of old age. The women also rarely
make use of an apron, yet they show clearly marked sexual modesty. A
woman is always very careful not to expose the external sex organs when
she sits or lies down in the presence of men. The greatest decency is
observed during the time of menstruation.

In Indonesia the feeling of modesty among those tribes that are in
constant contact with Europeans is essentially different from that of
the tribes less under foreign influence. Thus Nieuwenhuis (I., pp. 133,
134) mentions, for instance, the Bahaus and Kenyas of Central Borneo. Of
these the latter are only slightly influenced by the Mohammedan Malays,
the former, however, relatively much more so. Although members of both
tribes bathe completely naked, yet the Bahaus dress immediately after
the bath, whilst the Kenyas go naked to and from the bath. The Kenya
women also go naked to the spring to bring water and to bathe their
children. Whilst getting the boats through the rapids the Kenya men take
off their loin-cloths, but the Bahau men never do this. When
Nieuwenhuis' expedition stayed some time among the Kenyas, it was
noticed that the people got out of the habit of going about naked at
times. This was only because the Malays and Bahaus belonging to the
expedition had told the Kenyas that the white people objected to the
naked appearance of the natives (which was not correct). Nieuwenhuis
adds: "It can thus be seen what a great _rôle_ acquired modesty plays in
the evolution of clothes." The clothing of the present-day Dyaks serves
as a protection against the heat of the sun, and in the mountains
against cold, and as a prevention of the darkening of the skin (which,
particularly in women, is considered ugly); it is also used as an
ornament and to scare enemies, but never for the concealment of the
body. The Dyaks show shame when made embarrassed before other people; on
such occasions they blush right down to the breast. Nieuwenhuis made use
of this circumstance in the case of the Bahaus in order to make them
keep their promises and do their duties (II., p. 296).

The Eskimos in the far north of America are, as a rule, thickly clothed;
but it is quite usual for them to go about naked in their snow huts
without any thought of offending against decency.

Whoever lives for a time among naked savages becomes accustomed to their
nakedness, and does not feel anything objectionable in it. Æsthetically
there is this disadvantage, that the sick and the aged look very
repulsive in their decline; but then again youth and strength show off
to great advantage in nakedness.

If the origin of clothing is not due to sexual modesty, it would at
first appear strange that so many naked savages cover their sexual
organs either completely or partly, wearing a pubic apron or some
similar arrangement. The contrivances used are sometimes so small that
they can hardly have been intended as coverings. Thus the women of the
Karaib, Aruak, and Tupi tribes in the Xingui region all wear a
triangular piece of bark bast not more than 7 centimetres wide and 3
centimetres high. The lower end of the triangle runs into a perineal
strip of hard bark about 4 millimetres wide. Two narrow cords coming
from the two upper ends pass along the groins, and meet the narrow
perineal strip coming from the lower end of the triangle. These _uluri_
only just cover the beginning of the pubic cleft, pressing tightly on
it. The triangle does not reach the introitus vaginæ, which is, however,
closed, or at least kept inwards, by the pressure exerted by the
tightened strip of bast running from front to back. Similar binders are
used by the Indian women of Central Brazil. The binder used by the
Trumai women is twisted into a cord, serving still less as a cover. In
fact, none of these binders serve as covers, but they are intended to
close up and to protect the mucous membrane. This also applies to the
binders used by the various peoples living on the islands of the Pacific
Ocean, as, _e.g._, by the Mafulus of Papua.

Various contrivances are also to be met with among many primitive men
which seem to have the purpose of protecting the penis, and which really
achieve that end. Among certain tribes of Brazil penis wraps made from
palm straw are worn; other tribes use a T-shaped bandage, which is also
very common in Polynesia, Micronesia and Melanesia. The penis is pulled
up by means of the T-bandage, the testicles remaining free. Sometimes
old men use a broad band, under which they can also push the testicles.
In the New Hebrides, New Caledonia, and other places, the penis is
tightly bandaged, and is drawn up and fastened to the girdle by means of
a cord or band, the testicles hanging free. Calabashes are also used to
protect the penis. In Melanesia the penis pin goes with the calabash.
Georg Friederici (p. 155) says about its use: "The penis pin, which is
the shape of a wooden knitting needle, is stuck into the hair near the
comb, and is often brought into use. The calabash, which serves the
purpose of protecting the penis against injury in the bush and attacks
from insects, has the disadvantage of easily becoming loose and filling
quickly with water during swimming and wading. After every passage of a
river reaching above the pubic region a halt had to be made, during
which my men took off their calabashes and emptied them; then they put a
new layer of green leaves into the round opening, stuck the penis in,
and, with the help of the penis pin, pushed it in until it had
completely disappeared and the calabash lay close to the abdomen." When
sitting round the camp fire, and at other times, the men can be seen
drawing the pins from their hair and making their toilet. The covering
of the penis is undoubtedly intended as a protection of the sensitive
glans. Thus in the Brazilian forest the penis becomes endangered by
spines of leaves being brushed off the branches and boring themselves
deeply into the flesh; the spines get torn when pulled out, and cause
painful inflammations. For warding off insects the women of many Indian
tribes have tassels hanging in front of the sex organs. In the Northern
Territory of Australia both men and women wear such tassels. There are
still greater dangers in the wilderness. In Brazil there exists a small
fish (_Cetopsis candiru_) which has a tendency towards boring itself
into any of the exposed orifices of the body. It slips into the urethra,
and is prevented by its fins from getting out again, and thus may easily
bring about the death of the victim, to whom nothing remains but to
attempt an impromptu operation by slitting open the urethra with his
knife. Friederici remarks that it is just in those regions of tropical
America where the protection of the penis is most prevalent that fish
with sharp teeth (Pygocentrus species) are to be found which have a
tendency towards attacking protruding unprotected parts of the body,
thus often causing castration in men.

There is no foundation for the assumption of Adolf Gerson that men
invented the apron or resorted to binding up of the penis in order to
hide its erection, which would make them appear ridiculous, for sex
matters do not appear ridiculous to primitive people. In fact, such
contrivances cannot hide sexual excitement. Many peoples who use them do
not even have the wish to keep their excitement secret. Habituation to
nakedness ultimately lessens the stimulus to excitement. The following
fact, stated by Friederici, is worthy of notice: "During the many months
in which I lived exclusively among the natives I never saw even the
slightest sign of an erection in sleeping men, nor have I ever heard or
read that any one else has noticed such a thing among naked primitive
peoples, untouched by civilisation." Clothing has nothing to do with
sexual feelings or modesty among primitive people. To the people living
in the tropics clothes are essentially ornamental; they are worn for
reasons of vanity, not out of modesty. This can be well observed in
those cases where loin-cloths which actually cover up the pubic region
are raised without any consideration for people present, if there is any
danger of their becoming soiled or injured. The Malay women in the
central part of Luzon (Philippines), when working in the fields, discard
their wrappings without worrying in the least if observed by the men. It
is the same in other places.

As has been said before, among some naked peoples it is the custom for
the men to fasten up the penis without any covering under a hip band. In
other places they tie up the foreskin with a thread. By this means
protection is also given to the glans, but it is questionable whether
this was always the origin of this custom. In fact, it is doubtful
whether the need for protection was always the only reason for the
wearing of sheaths, binders, etc., for at least among some of the people
it is connected with some ceremonial which implies its sexual
significance. In the case of women, another factor may have played a
_rôle_, viz., the fact that menstruation is considered an illness, as
may be seen in the widespread custom of treating girls medically during
menstruation. The binder may have been intended to counteract the loss
of blood. The stretching of the foreskin which results from the use of
penis wraps, penis binders, etc., may be looked upon as a precaution
against phimosis, serving the same purpose as circumcision does among
numerous peoples.

Sexual modesty with regard to the naked body cannot be considered innate
in mankind, for it is unknown among many naked peoples. On the other
hand, there is an instinctive tendency in man to hide from his fellows
the effluvia of the sexual and digestive organs. Thus H. Ellis (p. 40)
gives a good explanation of the impulse towards concealment during the
sex act: "Both male and female need to guard themselves during the
exercise of their sexual activities from jealous rivals, as well as from
enemies who might take advantage of their position to attack them. It is
highly probable that this is one important factor in the constitution of
modesty, and it helps to explain how the male, not less than the female,
cultivates modesty and shuns publicity in the exercise of sexual
functions." The idea, begotten from fear, that sexual intercourse must
be kept secret, became easily extended to the feeling that such
intercourse was in itself wrong. The mystery surrounding sexual
intercourse has certainly been one of the factors leading to its
concealment. Primitive man has a tendency towards endowing with
supernatural powers all processes that he cannot understand; they become
sacred, and hence have to be carried out in privacy. The feeling of
disgust may perhaps be an additional reason for the concealment of the
sex act. The objects arousing disgust vary among different peoples
according to the conditions of their lives; but almost everywhere
dangerous things are classed under this category, to which belong,
according to the notion of primitive people, the discharges from the
sexual and digestive organs. It thus comes about that primitive man is
ashamed of urinating and defæcating even before persons of his own sex.
Even the lowest savage will seek out a very secluded spot for the
fulfilment of these functions. Thus Koch-Grünberg, for instance, says:
"The Indian goes deep into the wood for a certain business, comparing
favourably in this respect with our own peasants." Friederici writes of
the Melanesians that they are not at all ashamed to show the sexual
parts, but are extremely shy of exposing the anus, and will always avoid
letting themselves be seen during defæcation. In the central districts
the people betake themselves for this purpose early in the morning to
some outlying place, while those living near the sea go to the beach,
each person keeping as far away as possible from his neighbour. The
Africans that have not yet become spoiled by contact with strangers
also seek remote places (Weule and Schweinfurth). The negroes, however,
who are under Mohammedan influence, approach in this respect the beasts
of the field.

The tales of licentiousness among primitive people that are to be found
in old works of travel are mostly invented or grossly exaggerated.
Looseness and laxity do not exist anywhere, though the unwritten laws
which regulate the behaviour of the sexes are different from ours.
Unbridled indulgence is nowhere to be found; the public performance of
the sex act takes place only exceptionally among some peoples, and then
for ceremonial purposes. Even where, on festival occasions, marital
intercourse takes place as a matter of course, the couples disappear
into the darkness. So far as can be judged from ethnological literature,
Europeans have rarely had the opportunity of observing the sex act, and
then nearly exclusively among the African negroes, who must be reckoned
the most sensual of all existing peoples. (See the works of Leo
Frobenius and Georg Schweinfurth.)




II

PRE-MARITAL FREEDOM AND CONJUGAL FIDELITY


Travellers and missionaries, seeing things merely from the standpoint of
European civilisation, have for a long time attributed to primitive
people conceptions of sexual behaviour like our own. But the real truth
could not be hidden for long. It is now firmly established that the
moral ideas of primitive people differ as widely from ours as does their
sense of modesty. They do not consider sexual intercourse _per se_ as
immoral, and generally allow unmarried people full liberty. It is only
where a more advanced civilisation leads to material considerations in
the matter of sex relationship that, as a rule, this liberty is
restricted or entirely in abeyance. Should any consequences ensue from
the practice of free love, the lover is generally in duty bound to marry
the girl. Among some tribes, however, no such obligation exists; the
lover may break off his connection with the pregnant girl. Frequently in
cases of pre-marital pregnancy abortion is resorted to, which is very
prevalent among primitive races. Among some people, on the contrary, a
girl who has had a child gets married the more easily, for she has given
proof of her fertility. Besides, the child will be an additional worker
in the house.

Most peoples demand conjugal fidelity from their married women, though
we shall hear of some exceptions. It is certainly not correct, as
Buschan (1912, p. 237) says, that the rules concerning sexual
intercourse are stringent throughout for women, and that only in a
childless marriage may a woman take up with another man.

Among many peoples, living so far apart as Asia, Australia, Oceania and
Africa, we find that married men and women are in certain cases allowed
intercourse with other persons. The full meaning of this arrangement is
as yet unknown.

The idea of sexual purity is not innate nor unchangeable. Ethnographical
research has fully proved that purity in our sense of the term is
unknown even to-day among many peoples, and that there exist no
restrictions upon sexual intercourse except for the prevention of
cohabitation among blood relations. A greater or less degree of sexual
liberty before marriage prevails among most of those peoples in Asia
that are not under the influence of Islam, Buddhism and Hinduism.
Indeed, it even exists among some uncivilised Hindu tribes, as, _e.g._,
among the lower Hindu castes of Kashmir and of the Punjab mountains, the
various lower castes of Agra-Oudh, in the Central Provinces and Berar,
and in Southern India; but they restrict pre-marital relationship to
persons of their own community. Most Dravidian races, however, forbid
intercourse between members of the same exogamic group, though it takes
place at times in spite of this. The Mongolian races generally show
indifference in this respect. Thus T. C. Hudson (p. 78) says of the
Nagas in Manipur that they are conspicuous for their exceptionally loose
pre-marital relationship, although they demand strict fidelity in
marriage. Pre-marital intercourse between persons to whom marriage is
forbidden is not considered improper, which may be due to the fact that
the Nagas, like the Australian tribes, are ignorant of the process of
generation.

Among many native Indian tribes the grown-up children do not sleep in
their parents' huts, but in houses of their own, in which they commonly
visit each other by night. Should a girl become pregnant, the probable
father is expected to marry her. If he refuses, he has to pay damages,
and the girl is at liberty to marry some one else, which she can do
without any difficulty. Sometimes abortion is resorted to, especially
when both persons belong to the same exogamic group, the members of
which are not allowed to intermarry. The tribes of Baroda, the Maduvars
of Madras, and the Ghasyas of the United Provinces, permit a
probationary period of cohabitation. It is considered no disgrace for a
girl if the trial marriage does not result in a permanent marriage.
Among the Garos it is an unwritten law that after certain great
festivals young men and women may sleep together. Otherwise these Garos,
like the tribes and castes previously referred to, are strictly
monogamous. Sexual promiscuity often occurs after feasts, and it is not
restricted to the unmarried (Playfair, p. 68).

It is only seldom that unfaithfulness on the part of married women is
tolerated. But there are exceptions. Gait states that in the Djamna
mountains the women of the Thakkar, Megh, and other low castes lead just
as unrestrained a life after marriage as before. The Djats of
Baluchistan are in ill repute because they incite their married women to
unfaithfulness, if any advantage can be obtained thereby for the men.
Certain nomadic castes, such as the Mirasis, prostitute their women, and
the love affairs of married women of the servant class meet with no
opposition whatever. In the eastern region of Djamba, in the Punjab, the
husband is expected to allow a guest free entrance to the women's
chambers. In the western part of this province the Djats and Pathans
will often take back married women who have eloped, and not rarely a
husband will recognise as his own a son who may have been born while the
woman was away.

In Southern India married women enjoy a great deal of sexual freedom,
especially in those communities where the descent is reckoned in the
female line. Where marriage between cousins is customary, grown-up girls
are often married to quite young boys. During the immaturity of the
husband the wife is allowed to have sexual relations with the father of
her child husband or another near relation, sometimes even with any one
member of the caste chosen by her. This custom also exists in Kashmir,
not only among the Ladakhis, but also among other low Hindu castes, and
is also to be found in other parts of the world. Many South Indian
castes allow their married women much freedom with the relatives of
their husbands. The Tootiyans go so far as to forbid a husband to enter
his house if he finds the door locked and a relation's shoe before it.
The Maloyali, a mountain tribe, accept unfaithfulness on the part of
their wives quite lightly, unless the partner belongs to another caste;
if a woman lives for a time with a lover and has children during this
time, the husband will on her return recognise the children as his own.
The state of affairs is similar among the Kudans and Parivarams. Many
low Hindu castes in North Kanara allow their women extra-marital
intercourse with men of their own or of a higher caste. Among some
castes, such as the Irulas and Kurumbas, formal marriage is completely
unknown, an almost unbridled sexual promiscuity taking its place. A
Korawa of Madras who has debts to pay either pawns or simply sells his
wife. The Todas and other polyandrous communities of South India do not
know jealousy (Rivers, 1906, p. 592; Iyer, I., p. 136). An exception to
the rule that faithfulness in marriage is more strictly enforced than
purity before marriage is to be found among the Pongalakapus of Madras,
who allow extra-marital intercourse of married women, but punish that of
unmarried girls and widows (Gait).

The Veddahs of Ceylon, who, according to Paul and Fritz Sarasin, are
physically and intellectually of the lowest human type, practise
monogamy, which lasts until the death of one of the partners. Marital
unfaithfulness is rare, and leads to heavy punishment of the offending
rival, who, as a rule, is assassinated. Only where foreign influence has
become apparent is there a tendency to dissolve marriage before death
(Paul and Fritz Sarasin).

Hose and MacDougall mention that among the nomadic hunting tribes of
Inner Borneo "the women are chaster after marriage than before."
Apparently neither sex practises much restraint. A girl's pregnancy
generally results in her marriage with the father of the expected child.
Amongst the settled tribes of Borneo a young man seeks a love affair as
soon as he is attracted to the other sex; he may have relations with
several girls one after another, but generally marries early. The
marriage age of the men is about twenty, of the girls still earlier.
There is no information about their marital fidelity.

The Dutchmen Hinlopen and Severijn state that in 1852 they found on the
Poggi Islands, on the west coast of Sumatra, a state of complete
promiscuity. Some of the men are said to get married, but only very
late, between the ages of forty and fifty, when their detailed tattooing
is completed; it is only seldom that a young man takes a separate wife.
G. A. Wilken enumerates the following East Indian communities as living
in sexual promiscuity: the Lubus, the Orang-Sakai of Malacca, the
Olo-Ot, and other Bornean tribes; the inhabitants of the island Peling.
He adduces no evidence, however; and his statement is certainly
incorrect as far as the Sakai of Malacca are concerned. Among the
non-Christian tribes of the Philippine Islands considerable pre-marital
liberty prevails. Among the Igorotes, _e.g._, the dormitory of the
unmarried girls (the _olag_) serves also as the pairing place of the
marriageable young people. In the villages young people, joking and
laughing, can frequently be seen going about wrapped in one blanket and
with their arms round each other. There is no secrecy about the wooing;
it is carried on mainly in the _olag_. Marriage rarely takes place
without previous intercourse, and seldom before the girl is pregnant. An
exception to this rule only occurs when a rich man marries a girl
against her will at the parents' wish. Not infrequently a young man has
affairs with two or three girls at one and the same time. The girls
quite openly and unmistakably invite the men to go with them into the
_olag_. As soon as a girl becomes pregnant, she at once joyfully informs
the father of the child, for these people are very fond of children. If
the man refuses to marry the girl, there is likely to be tears, but no
one is much concerned about the infidelity itself, because the girl can
find a husband later on in spite of her having borne a child; indeed,
the more so, as there can be no doubt of her fertility. It is not
customary for married men to enter the _olag_. A young man, however, can
go there if his former love has remained single and welcomes him,
because she still has hopes of becoming his wife, for it is easy to get
a separation, and if a man can afford it, he may have two or three
wives, though polygamy is rare. A man whose wife is pregnant does not
visit the _olag_, for it is feared that this may bring about a premature
birth and cause the death of the child. Married women apparently remain
always faithful (A. E. Jenks, p. 66). Ferdinand Blumentritt makes a
statement, based on Spanish information, that the girls' houses of the
Igorotes serve the purpose of ensuring pre-marital purity. This,
however, is incorrect.

Very similar customs prevail among the Naga tribes of Assam (Peal, pp.
244 _et seq._).

The pure Senoi and Semang tribes of the Malay Peninsula practise strict
monogamy. Marriage takes place at an early age, sometimes between boys
of fourteen and girls of thirteen. Even betrothals of children seem to
occur. Marital unfaithfulness is punished with death (Martin, 1905, p.
864).


In many districts of Australia, indeed, among the majority of the
natives of the Australian continent, there exist two forms of sexual
union side by side. The one form consists in a girl's being given in
marriage to one man without regard to the difference in ages, and also
without any consideration for feelings of personal sympathy. Indeed,
such is hardly possible, for the girls are given to the men at a very
young age. The main cause of these unions is apparently economic. It
ensures the man a housekeeper for himself who has to gather the largest
share of provisions, for the result of the man's hunting yields only a
very small part of the absolutely essential food. A man may have,
according to his social position, one or more such housekeepers. In
addition, each man and woman may form a union with one or more of the
other sex merely for the purpose of sexual intercourse. Unlike the
"marriages" previously mentioned, these unions do not take place without
any formality--there is a special ceremony for the occasion. They do not
last for life, at least among some of the tribes, but are regulated from
time to time. This form of sexual union is generally called _pirauru_ in
ethnographical literature, after the designation in use among the tribes
of the Dieri, where this kind of sex community was first observed. The
men of a _pirauru_ group are either consanguineous or collateral
brothers, members of one and the same subdivision of the tribe;
similarly, the women of a _pirauru_ group are consanguineous or
collateral sisters. Sexual intercourse with a _pirauru_ wife is allowed
during the absence of the husband who is her usual mate, and also at
special festivals. When a man's housekeeper dies, her children are cared
for by one of his _pirauru_ wives until he gets another housekeeper.
Without the institution of _pirauru_, the younger men would be barred
from sexual intercourse. Many of them are without housekeepers, as most
of the young women are in the possession of the older influential men.
It has been said that the old men are often killed by the young men on
this account (Spencer, p. 11). The majority of the tribes that have the
institution of _pirauru_ are ignorant of the connection between sexual
intercourse and conception (see Chapter VI.). It is therefore not the
production of progeny which seems to be the purpose of a common
household between man and woman, nor of the _pirauru_ unions.

Institutions similar to the Australian _pirauru_ also exist outside
Australia. Codrington (p. 22) has established the fact that in the
Solomon Islands and in other parts of Melanesia a woman of an exogamic
group who is not yet married to one particular man may legitimately have
sexual intercourse with all men of another exogamic group who are her
potential husbands. The exogamic groups play a far more important _rôle_
than individual marriage. In the Fijian Islands every man has the right
to sexual intercourse with his wife's sisters. On special ceremonial
occasions intercourse is permitted between those groups of men and women
who stand in the relationship of possible conjugal partners (Thomson, p.
185).

Pre-marital sexual freedom of both sexes exists, or did exist, all over
the South Sea islands before the advent of European influence. Thus,
_e.g._, Robert W. Williamson (pp. 172-176) writes of the Mafulus, in
the mountains of New Guinea, that unmarried youths and maidens are
allowed to associate with each other without any precautions. There
exists a good deal of "immorality." Even after marriage (which takes
place with an elaborate pretence of bride capture) husband and wife are,
as a rule, not faithful to each other, the marriage bond being very
loose. But it is said that unfaithfulness on the part of the women
(though not of the men) is considered a great offence. The injured
husband used to have the right of killing the guilty man, which he did,
as a rule, until the British authorities put an end to the practice.
Nowadays the deceived husband is generally satisfied if he receives a
pig or some other article of value from the guilty rival.


In Africa sexual community is allowed at certain periods among the
Hereros (Brinker, p. 88). Among many other Bantu tribes sexual communism
is customary, particularly at the initiation of the young people. The
girls, too, are allowed to choose male partners for a time, and among
many tribes of South Africa it was customary for the girls who refused
to be given to men against their will. The Colonial Government has now
put a stop to this (Theal).

The statements about the Hottentots of South Africa vary. But the custom
of _sore_, which is found among them, seems to point to the existence of
an institution similar to the Australian _pirauru_. Schultze (pp. 299,
319) thinks that illicit love was punished among the Hottentots before
the extensive immigration of the white people into South Africa led to
the overthrow of their old customs. Either the guilty couple were
beaten, with the consent of the parents, or the lover received, in
addition to his own, his sweetheart's share of punishment. But Schultze
mentions also that the institution of _sore_, intended ostensibly for
the exchange of love gifts, really means in many cases a secret
agreement for intimate extra-marital relationship, though it is
generally quite honourable. This institution is by no means an
innovation.

The Hamitic tribes of East Africa, who belong to the most warlike races
of mankind, permit pre-marital intercourse of both sexes. A. C. Hollis
(1909, pp. 16, 77) says of the Nandi; "The unmarried warriors, as many
as ten, sleep in the huts called _sigiroinet_, where the girls visit
them and remain with them a few days, living with them in free love."
Married women are not allowed to enter these huts. When the warriors go
away for a time or go to war, their sweethearts keep the huts in order.
Real "family life" is unknown, for the bigger boys and girls also live
alone in special huts or together with the old women; the little boys
who serve the warriors sleep in their houses. There is no publicly
recognised punishment for adultery; but if a husband discovers another
man not belonging to his _mat_ (one of the subdivisions of each of the
seven age classes) with his wife or one of his wives, he beats him
severely. Adultery is also not considered wrong when it concerns a
couple that have previously lived together in free love in the warriors'
house, even when the woman does not belong to a _mat_ comrade. When a
Nandi travels and wishes to remain somewhere overnight, he must first of
all apply to another member of his _mat_ in the place. If there is one,
and both men are married, the latter gives hospitality to the guest,
commissions his wife to fulfil his wishes, and leaves the hut in order
to sleep elsewhere. The wife pours water over the hands of the guest,
brings him a stool and food, puts his weapons into a place of safety,
and spends the night with him. Should there be no member of his _mat_ in
the place, the traveller betakes himself to a member of the nearest
_mat_; and, after having explained the situation, he is treated exactly
as if both men belonged to the same _mat_. Members of different age
classes do not offer each other hospitality or expect it. If the
traveller is unmarried, he spends the night in the warriors' hut.
Children born before marriage are killed by the Nandis, only one group
making an exception to this rule.

The Masai have when travelling the same customs as the Nandis. Sexual
intercourse with a girl or woman of the same age class is not considered
wrong. A warrior marries the girl he makes pregnant. Children born
before marriage are considered a disgrace. A person who has relations
with a woman belonging to the paternal age class must beg pardon of the
older men and give as reparation two oxen or a commensurate quantity of
honey wine. An old man who has sexual intercourse with his daughter or
with another girl of her age is severely punished, if the affair comes
to light: he is beaten, his kraal is pulled down, and his cattle are
killed _ad libitum_ (Hollis, 1905, pp. 287, 312, 313).

Of the conditions existing among the Baganda in East Africa the
missionary John Roscoe (p. 10) gives us the following picture: "Neither
the men nor the women controlled their sexual cravings unless
insurmountable obstacles came in the way. Women, however, could only
attain their aims by stratagem. If an unmarried girl became pregnant,
the guilty man had to pay a fine, and he was induced to marry the girl.
If a husband discovered his wife with another man, he had the right to
kill them both. Nevertheless the married women kept in strict seclusion
used to receive lovers, which even the most dreadful punishments for
adultery could not prevent." It has to be noticed that the social
formation of classes was already greatly developed among the Baganda at
the time described by Roscoe. The wealthy men were in a position to have
as many wives as they could support, so that there was a scarcity of
women for the remaining men. It is not remarkable, therefore, that these
tried to meet this fact by force and cunning. Although married women
were secluded, single girls had a fair amount of liberty.

Among the Bushmen of South Africa, now nearly extinct, husband and wife
remained faithful to each other for life. But if they became tired of
each other, no hindrance was put in the way of separation and
remarriage. A second husband, however, or a second wife was most
probably never accepted into the family; their passionate temperament
was against it (Theal).


About the Indians of North-west Brazil Koch-Grünberg relates: "Whilst
young girls enjoy the greatest liberty, their purity not being
necessarily above suspicion, marriage itself is generally on a higher
plane; a married couple are rarely unfaithful to each other."
Koch-Grünberg has never noticed even the semblance of indecent behaviour
between married people, nor under normal circumstances any serious
quarrels or ugly scenes. The same or similar conditions prevail nearly
all over South America where European influence is not yet predominant.
Karl von den Steinen (p. 501) mentions one exception to this rule. The
Bororos, who live on the St. Lourenco river, and who were visited by
him, have greatly degenerated, thanks to the civilising arts of the
Brazilians. A marriage is concluded without any formality and without
the consent of the parents. The young wife remains with her children in
her parents' house. The young husband only spends the night there;
during the day he lives in the men's house when he is not hunting. The
young couple have a hearth for themselves, the grandmother with the
grandchildren sitting somewhat apart. Thus it remains up to the death of
the grandparents. The grandmother suckles the child when the young wife
accompanies her husband on the hunt or fetches palm nuts from the woods;
she still has milk when her children marry. Young unmarried men live
together in special men's houses. They look out betimes for wives. There
are two customs which deserve our interest. A girl's ear-lobes are bored
by her future husband. If he himself does not marry her, his son does
so. Furthermore, the man who puts the penis cuff on a boy becomes
related to him and marries his sister or his aunt. Girls were taken to
the men's house quite openly by day, or were caught at night. These
girls were not married to one man; any children born were fathered on
those men with whom the girl had had relations. This state of affairs is
the result of the overweening power wielded by the older men. The women
are their possession, and a regular income of arrows and trinkets is
earned by hiring out the girls to the men's house. Unnatural intercourse
is not unknown in the men's house, but it occurs only when there is an
exceptionally great scarcity of girls. According to a statement of a
native, the same conditions prevail in the remote villages, where some
only of the members of a tribe have permanent possession of the women.
But such information given by the natives must be accepted with great
caution. No similar customs have become known anywhere else in South
America.

In North America the young people also had great liberty, but the
married women dared not break their faith. Among many tribes, especially
the nomadic hunting tribes, there existed patriarchal conditions, with
complete subordination of the women. Intercourse with any one but their
rightful husbands was taken in bad part. Nowadays the Indians of North
America, with the exception of a small remnant living in the Canadian
Tundra, have come under the influence of Christianity. The probable
existence of an earlier sex communism among the North American Indians
has been described in full by L. H. Morgan.

F. Nansen reports that among the Christian Eskimos of the west coast of
Greenland the girls do not consider pre-marital motherhood as a
disgrace. The green hair-band which the unmarried mothers have to wear
is put on by them long before it is necessary. The young Greenland girls
do not deem any concealment of their love affairs necessary. In East
Greenland, which has not yet been reached by Christianity, it is
customary for a man who wants a wife simply to abduct the girl from her
house or tent. The abduction is often only a pretence, for the couple
have settled it all between themselves. Formerly this form of marriage
was in vogue all over Greenland. The relations look on quietly, for it
is all a private affair of those immediately concerned. Should the girl
really not wish to have the suitor, she will defend herself until she
quietens down or the wooer renounces her. Divorce also takes place
without any difficulties; but generally the marriage is continued if
there is a child, particularly if it should be a boy. If a man covets
the wife of another, he will take her without any hesitation, if he is
the stronger. Among the non-Christian Eskimos most of the skilful
hunters have two wives, but never more. The first wife is generally
looked upon as the superior. Temporary exchange of wives occurs up to
the present time even among the Christians on the west coast, especially
when the people have to spend the summer hunting the reindeer in the
interior of the country. As a rule, married people live on exceptionally
good terms with each other.

Among the Netchili Eskimos near the Magnetic North Pole, however,
conjugal harmony is, according to Roald Amundsen, not of the best. As a
rule, the wife only escapes being beaten when she is stronger than the
man. Exchange of women is quite common. Most of the girls are destined
from birth for certain men, though sometimes things do not turn out as
the parents wish it. When the girl is fourteen years old she seeks out
her bridegroom, or he comes to her. There is no wedding. Amundsen doubts
whether the couple have, as a rule, any tender feelings towards each
other. The girl is just given to the man by the parents, the man
marrying her in order to have one more domestic drudge, for in reality
the wife is nothing more nor less than a domestic animal. Most Eskimos
offer their wives to any one.

Among the Kamchadales, Chukchee, Jukagiers and Tunguses of North Asia
the girls have pre-marital liberty, and there exists no marital
fidelity. W. Bogoras (p. 602) describes "group marriage" among the
Chukchee, which seems to be an institution similar to the Australian
_pirauru_. There are groups, consisting of up to ten men or women, that
have the right to sexual intercourse with each other; "but this right is
comparatively rarely taken advantage of, only when a man has for some
reason to visit the camp of one of his group companions. The host then
gives up to him his place in the sleeping room, and if possible leaves
the house for the night, going, for instance, to his flock. Afterwards
the host generally seeks an opportunity of returning the visit, so as to
exercise his rights in turn." The sex communities are generally composed
of neighbours and friends. The offspring of brothers and sisters in the
second and third generations are, as a rule, united in the same sex
community, but not brothers. Bogoras thinks that the communities were
originally limited to members of a group who were related, and were only
later extended to other people; the ceremonies at the formation of a
group seem to imply this. The persons concerned bring sacrifices and
anoint themselves with blood, first in the one and then in the other
camp. The admission into a group of persons who greatly diverge from
each other in age is not welcomed, and single men are also not willingly
admitted. The inhabitants of one and the same camp are seldom willing
to form a sex community, for reciprocal relationship is intended as an
exception rather than the rule, though there are deviations from this
rule. Every individual family of the Chukchee belongs in practice to
some sex community. Should a family keep to themselves, it would
indicate that they had no friends and no protectors in time of need. The
children of members of a sex community are reckoned as near blood
relations, and may not marry one another.

It is quite different among the Koryaks, the neighbours of the Chukchee.
They demand abstinence from the girls before marriage, and there is
rarely any transgression against this law. Pregnancy before marriage is
a disgrace, and unmarried mothers are forced to give birth in the
wilderness. Children born before marriage are killed. After the advent
of puberty the girls sleep in their "combinations," which are fashioned
in such a way as to exclude undesirable intercourse. Intercourse between
engaged couples is also looked upon as sinful. Sometimes the girl lives
with relatives in another place for a time, or is kept hidden until the
bridegroom works off at her parents' home the service which he owes to
them. Incest is strictly avoided, for it is feared that the evil-doers
must die in consequence of it. The various prohibitions existing at the
present day with regard to the marriage of certain consanguineous or
adopted relations are only of recent date; they were unknown formerly
(Jochelson, p. 733). Perhaps the other existing sexual customs are also
the result of missionary activities.

The above examples, chosen at random, plainly show that the conceptions
of sexual morality generally held by primitive people are different from
those prevalent under European civilisation. Very often these primitive
customs have been greatly influenced or altogether exterminated by the
example or the power of the European colonists. Whether this was of
benefit to the races cannot be discussed here.

After all, European morality is not so very superior to that of the
"savages." As Georg Friederici (p. 85) pertinently says: "Almost
everywhere in our society we shut our eyes to the fact that our young
men do what is forbidden to them, but is permitted to the Melanesian and
Polynesian girls. We admit the State regulation of prostitution or, to
avoid greater scandal, even street prostitution; yet we set out in moral
indignation to reform the customs of primitive peoples which have proved
their value and are consistent with their moral laws. Having nothing
better to put in their place, we merely introduce among them what
happens to be our own canker."

Everywhere the fight against the traditional moral ideals has resulted
merely in the introduction of prostitution, with all its corruption. We
should therefore refrain from reforms that are misplaced, and should not
attack customs that cannot be replaced by better ones, and that do not
stand in the way of colonisation.




III

COURTSHIP CUSTOMS


Very often we find among primitive people that marriage is preceded by a
pretended bride capture, though the couple themselves and their
relations have agreed to the union. This gave occasion to the belief
that the capture of women was formerly a widespread and original form of
marriage. The pretended capture does not, however, seem to imply the
existence of true "marriage by capture," but rather seems to indicate
the fact that formerly brides were often given to men against their will
and had to be forced to go with them. The fact that often the abducting
bridegroom is in fun beaten by the brothers or other male relations of
the girl does not exclude this conclusion, for the thrashing may be a
later embellishment of the game of abduction, its purpose being to
increase the pleasure of the guests by satisfying their spectacular
desire. It is worthy of note that in Assam among the matriarchal Garos
there is a pretended capture of the bridegroom. It would be a mistake to
conclude from this that formerly mother-rule actually existed among the
Garos. In the report on the ethnographical survey of the Indian Central
Provinces (V., p. 53) it is stated that it was formerly customary among
the Kulams to capture men for those of their girls who would otherwise
have remained unmarried.

Among the peoples whose girls are married at a very young age no wooing
is customary, as, _e.g._, among the Dravidian Indians, the Australians,
their near relations, and others. Marriage in these cases takes place
without any or with very little ceremony (Jagor, Spencer, Howitt). It
has been impossible so far in India to check the evil custom of child
marriage; on the contrary, it is becoming more prevalent among the
animistic tribes.

Child engagements rather than child marriages are prevalent among many
peoples, as among the Asiatic Polar races and the Eskimos of North
America. But among most of these peoples free courtship exists. Thus
Jochelson writes about the Koryaks in the extreme north-east of Asia:
"If a Koryak falls in love with a girl, he generally sends a match-maker
to the father of the girl; but this is not always the case, and
particularly so if the parents do not agree to the son's choice.
Frequently the young man, without telling anybody of his intentions,
goes to the girl's home and does all the work there which is seemly for
a man. The father-in-law accepts his services also in silence. If he is
pleased with the bridegroom, he entrusts him with commissions; otherwise
he lets him feel that he must leave the house. The bridegroom's service
lasts from six months to three years. This service cannot be conceived
as 'payment' for the bride, for the wealthier of the Konaks could pay
with reindeer instead of working off the price of the bride. Besides,
the bride receives a dowry of reindeer, which is worth much more than
the service given by the son-in-law. This service is only an empty
formality, if the wooer is an older man. It rather seems as if the main
purpose of the service is to put the bridegroom to the test, for it is
not the actual work done that is of most importance, but the harsh
treatment that he has to endure and the meagre and laborious life that
he is forced to lead. The service comes to an end whenever the
father-in-law decides. The man then leads his bride home without any
formality, although she at first pretends to struggle against it; she
gives up this pretence as soon as the man succeeds in touching her sex
organs. Should a girl really not care for the man intended for her, she
will attempt to escape in reality; but she is ultimately forced by her
parents into marriage. Often, however, the girl's inclination is taken
into consideration before she is given into marriage."

Among the inland tribes of Borneo young people get married as soon as
they have reached maturity. The young man sends a confidential friend to
the parents of the girl desired, who, as a matter of form, make
objections and invent all manner of excuses. Only after the second or
third visit of the go-between is the matter taken at all seriously and a
decision arrived at. If the parents agree, they receive from the
go-between presents sent by the bridegroom, and the girl sends her lover
strings of pearls. The time of the new moon is considered the best time
for marriage. The wedding day is kept count of by both parties having
strings with an equal number of knots, from which one knot is cut off
each day. The marriage is celebrated with festivities, the bridegroom
and guests appearing in war dress; there is great feasting and much
ceremony (Hose and McDougall, II., pp. 171 _et seq._).

Among the Mafulu, a hill tribe of New Guinea, child engagements are
frequent, but the courting of adults seems to predominate. R. W.
Williamson writes (p. 170) that in one case known to him a girl of
sixteen or seventeen years old was looked upon as married to the yet
unborn son of a chief. When the boy died in early childhood, the girl
was reckoned to be his widow. If a young Mafulu youth wishes to marry
and does not know where to look for a bride, he will sometimes light a
fire outside the village; he will wait to see in which direction the
next gust of wind will blow the smoke, and there he will turn to seek a
wife. Often the youth carries about with him a bag with small pieces of
wood and stone. He rubs a piece of tobacco between two pieces and sends
it to the girl of his choice by one of her female relatives. He believes
that by this procedure the girl's heart will be turned towards him
through some mysterious power. The young men often obtain the necessary
pieces of wood or stone from a magician. The offer of marriage is also
made through a third person, generally a woman. The consent of the
parents is necessary; the marriage takes place without any special
ceremony.

Among the pigmy races of Asia and Africa child marriage exists side by
side with adult courtship. Of the Negritos of Zambales (Philippine
Islands) W. A. Reed (p. 56) says that the suitor has to pay a price for
the bride. The parents try to bargain for as much as possible, and it is
only when these demands have been fulfilled that the daughter has any
choice in the matter. The young man who has found a suitable girl
informs his family of the fact; they decide how much the girl is worth
and how much must be paid for her. Thereupon the suitor or a relative
inquires of the girl's family whether they agree to the marriage. If
they do, the purchase price is brought within a few days, and in case
this proves satisfactory to the parents these give their consent. In
many cases the girls are already in early youth promised to the boys
chosen by the parents, but the children remain with their parents until
maturity. Sometimes little girls are given to grown-up men, so that the
difference in ages is great, and the girls very unwillingly obey their
parents' will. When two families have daughters _and_ sons the girls are
exchanged as wives without either of the families paying a price. It is
said that slaves and stolen strange children are given as payment for
the bride. It is doubtful, however, according to W. A. Reed, whether
this still occurs. In many parts of the country the settlement of the
price is followed by feasting and dancing, at which pretended capture of
the bride plays a great _rôle_.

Among the Hamites of East Africa the custom exists of assigning girls
still far from mature as wives to certain adult men. If, _e.g._, a Masai
wishes to marry, he courts a very young girl, whose father receives
presents repeatedly. After the ritual operation is performed upon the
girl the young man goes to live in the house of his father-in-law,
bringing with him as gifts three cows and two oxen. When the time comes
for taking the bride home, an additional present of three sheep is made.
The girl puts on her bridal dress and follows the man without further
ceremony. A man who possesses a big herd of cattle can have many wives,
some rich men having as many as ten or twenty wives (Hollis, 1905, pp.
302, 303).

Among the negroes adult people have the right to choose their mates,
though choice is restricted through various traditional considerations.
Child engagements are not uncommon. Thus among the Bantus it is even
to-day often customary to assign children at an early age to each other
for marriage. Weule (p. 58) says of the Jaos in East Africa: "It is a
general custom for a woman who has just given birth to a child to say to
a pregnant neighbour: 'I have a daughter' (or 'a son'); 'if your child
proves to be a son' (or 'a daughter'), 'they shall marry each other.'
The other generally agrees, and this arrangement is adhered to later.
For adults there exist no special rules in the choice of mates nowadays,
and it is doubtful whether such existed previously. If a serf wants to
marry, he tells his father, who informs the master. The latter then
speaks with the father of the chosen girl. If the father agrees, the
daughter is brought in and asked for her opinion. If she is not willing
to marry the suitor, the affair is at an end. If she agrees, the
relatives, with the master at the head, consult together, and the
decision is then made. Among the Mokondes in the north of the Rowuma
river the young man looking out for marriage lets his parents negotiate
with the girl's parents. If they come to an agreement, the bridegroom
gives the bride's parents a present, which makes the affair binding.
Among the more conservative classes the eldest brother of the girl's
mother also has a voice in the matter, getting a share of the
bridegroom's presents. In olden times a Makonde boy lived after his
circumcision with one of his maternal uncles, into whose family he
afterwards married. If there were no girls in the family, he waited for
a cousin. The young man had to do all the work at his uncle's house
until the daughter grew up. Among the Makuas the suitor himself goes to
the girl's father, who again must get the consent of the mother's eldest
brother. Often all the brothers, instead of one, must be consulted. The
suitor goes the next day for his answer. If the answer is 'Yes,' the
time for the wedding is appointed, at which well-meant speeches are
made, and advice is given to the bridal pair. As a rule, the couple are
more or less of the same age, but it sometimes happens that young girls
are married by men much older than themselves."

Of the Hottentots Schultze (p. 297) writes: "A man who wishes to get a
confession of love from the girl of his choice gives her a little piece
of wood. If the two have come to an agreement, they break it, each
holding at one end, and then they throw the broken pieces at each
other's chest. The couple then commence courting, during which time they
are not allowed to speak a word with each other or to reach each other
anything. An intermediary acts between them for this purpose.
Transgressions have to be expiated by presents. It is all an amorous
game of hide-and-seek, which has hardened into a rigid custom. It can
continue thus for months or for a year, and longer, before the affair
ripens. This can happen in two ways: either openly by the parents'
consent being asked, or secretly by means of a symbolic action which
expresses the girl's agreement to complete surrender. The young man
draws off one of his skin shoes and throws it to the girl in private. If
she disregards the shoe, the proposal for an early union is rejected; in
the contrary case she gives the shoe back. When the wedding is to come
off, the parents negotiate with each other for some time, but more in
pretence than real earnest. When an agreement has been reached, the
marriage is celebrated with feasting."

Among the Indians marriage is entered into by free courtship, though
girls in particular, just as with us, are greatly dependent upon the
will of their parents. The girls marry sometimes at a very early age,
but marriage before maturity seems non-existent.

Koch-Grünberg (I., pp. 181, 182) says of the Siusis that the choice of
partners is not always the affair of those directly concerned. Often the
parents, or the father alone, choose the husband for the daughter. The
parents have no such strong influence on the son's choice. The wedding
is celebrated by dancing, which goes on for several days at the house of
the bride's father. At the end of the festivities the latter makes a
long speech to his son-in-law, and gives him over his daughter as wife,
wherewith the marriage is consummated. The young wife goes to her
husband's house, which, as a rule, also serves as the home of her
parents-in-law. The trousseau is generally small.

Among the Kobeua Indians of the Upper Rio Negro a young man wishing to
marry asks the permission of the father of his bride-elect. If he
consents, the bridegroom remains for five days in the house of his
parents-in-law, and a big dance and banquet is held, in which many
guests take part. At the end of the feast the father gives over his
daughter to his son-in-law, whereupon the couple go off, the father
breaking out into a ceremonial lament. Amongst some races capture of
women is said to be still customary. In any case the wife has to be from
another tribe. Evidence of woman capture is still to be found in the
tradition of the tribe (Koch-Grünberg, II., pp. 144, 145).

The Bakairis have no wedding celebrations. The marriage is discussed by
the parents. If they come to an agreement, the bride's father receives
some trifles as a present. The bridegroom hangs up his hammock above
that of the girl, and everything is settled. It is only where the tribe
has fallen into decay that great differences in the ages of the married
people occur, and that older men in particular have the privilege of
possessing young wives (compare Chapter II.). Divorce can be got without
difficulty, even when the man is unwilling.

Among the Paressis the marriage is arranged by the parents on both
sides, and the bride, after having received a few presents, is led by
her parents without any formality to her bridegroom's hammock (von den
Steinen, pp. 331, 434).

The custom of paying a price for the bride, prevalent among many races
all over the world, is frequently spoken of as marriage by purchase. The
price is very varied, and its value very unequal, but as a rule it is
relatively small, and not infrequently it is so small as to have no
economic value for the parents-in-law. Among the animistic tribes of
British India, who, as a rule, pay a price for the bride, the sum may
be as much as 200 rupees. Generally more is paid for a virgin than for a
widow; but there are some Indian castes of manual labourers among whom
the woman takes a share in the industrial work, and among whom the
reverse is the case. It sometimes happens that the price is adjusted
according to the age of the bride. Often brides are exchanged between
two families, so that the payment of a price is dispensed with.
"Marriage by service" still persists in various places, especially in
Asia. Here the future son-in-law, instead of paying a price for the
bride, has to work a certain number of years for the father of the
bride. Among most primitive people the woman represents labour power in
the house, as the men, either wholly or to a large extent, occupy
themselves with social concerns (E. Hahn). Domestic prosperity depends
wholly on the women's work. Thus it can easily be seen how the custom
came about of demanding some service from the man who wanted a wife.
Real purchase of a wife occurs only exceptionally among primitive
people. It is never the rule, nor is the woman a real object of barter.
If actual sale of women occurs in some cases, it is only an exception.
Such cases are only frequent where the influence of Islam is most
pronounced.

The bride price is wholly or partly paid back should the wife run away,
or even if she meets with an early death. If there are sisters, the
forsaken husband or widower may sometimes forego the restitution of the
price paid and accept one of the sisters as his wife.

In India a price for the bridegroom is paid, not only among the upper
castes of the civilised races, but also occasionally among the lower
castes and among the primitive natives.




IV

MARRIAGE


By far the greatest number of primitive peoples are monogamous. Only in
relatively few cases is there polyandry. Polygyny often occurs among
persons who are specially favoured, either economically or socially; but
it is nowhere the form of marriage of the majority of the population.
The polygyny reported among certain tribes generally refers only to
chiefs, magic doctors, or some other special persons who have more than
one wife. Sexual group communism at the side of monogamy or polyandry
has been found in various places, but it is wrong to speak of it as
"group marriage." This is evident from the previously quoted examples of
the _pirauru_ in Australia, the sex communities among the Chukchee, the
Nandi, Masai, and others. It is possible, of course, that monogamy which
now co-exists with certain cases of sex communism may have been a later
addition, but this is not proven. It is more likely that the pairing
instinct (not identical with the instinct of procreation) is
characteristic of our sub-human ancestors. In fact, even in the animal
world there are numerous examples of monogamy (P. Deegener).

It has been established that in Africa, Indonesia, Melanesia, and
elsewhere, the small children remain with their parents, while the
bigger children are lodged together in special boys' and girls' houses,
and are, as it were, brought up communally. The relationship of the
children to their own parents is not notably closer than that between
them and other persons of the same age class. We must not look upon this
child communism solely as a curiosity, but as the relic of a very
ancient primitive institution. Most likely there is some connection
between child communism and the interchange of children which is
customary, for example, among the Dravidian races of India
("Ethnographical Survey of the Central India Agency") and on the Murray
Islands, in the Torres Straits (Australia). According to W. H. R. Rivers
(1907, p. 318), the interchange of children between families is very
frequent here without the peoples being able to give any explanation of
it. Nor do other social and religious institutions offer any indication
as to the origin of this custom. Rivers surmises that it has been
preserved from a social organisation in which "children were largely
common to the women of the group so far as nurture was concerned." At
any rate, this adoption _en masse_ will help civilised man to understand
that less civilised peoples have ideas about parenthood different from
those that exist among us, and also that group motherhood is not absurd.
The existence of group motherhood among primitive communities--whose
members were much more dependent on each other in the struggle for
existence than are the members of much more advanced societies--must
often have been of considerable advantage to these communities. On the
assumption of "group motherhood" it is easily explainable that children
use the same mode of address for their own sisters and brothers as for
all the other children of the group, and that all the women of equal
ages are called "mother." Hence the classificatory system of
relationship ceases to be puzzling. It becomes clear why under this
system whole groups of persons designate each other as husbands and
wives, and why the children of all the persons of these groups call each
other brothers and sisters, etc. The assumption is justified that man in
a low state of civilisation knew only group relationship; further
distinctions were derived only later from these relationships, the
present-day classificatory system arising ultimately from them. Among
the peoples where Rivers could examine this system there were
indications of a development in the direction of using it rather for the
distinction of real blood and marriage relationship than for the
distinction of social position, for which it was originally intended. A
connection between marriage regulation and the classificatory system of
relationships exists not only among the Dravidian races, but also among
the North American Indians, and certainly among other branches of the
human race. Rivers says: "The classificatory system in one form or
another is spread so widely over the world as to make it probable that
it had its origin in some universal stage of social development"; and
further he says: "The kind of society which most readily accounts for
its chief features is one characterised by a form of marriage in which
definite groups of men are the husbands of definite groups of women."
Rivers does not mean thereby institutions like the _pirauru_, but a
permanent group marriage. It may be objected against this latter
assumption that permanent (not occasional) sex communism does not
necessarily need to be connected with communism of children. It is quite
possible that monogamy and child communism may exist side by side, as,
_e.g._, among the Murray Islanders.

But even if group marriage did really exist in some places, and if the
existence of child communism would prove this, it still cannot be
asserted that it is a phase of development through which all human races
have passed. For the assumption of a parallel development of all races
is untenable. It is true the basic psychic organisation is the same for
all human beings, being due to the common descent of mankind. But owing
to the continual adaptation to changing environmental conditions, it was
not preserved, but underwent different changes. There is no ground for
the assumption that, while environmental changes brought about bodily
modifications, mental changes did not take place also, therewith leading
at the same time to differences in social culture. On the contrary, we
must rather assume that together with anthropological variations among
the races there also arose variations in social development, the
different civilisations resulting from differentiated mental
dispositions and deviating more and more from each other. Certain
elements of the original primitive civilisation have been preserved in
the various later developments, but not everywhere the same elements,
nor were the differentiations that did take place all of the same
degree. Certain fundamental conceptions may remain unchanged for long
periods, and may produce analogous phenomena in different civilisations.
Since deviations from monogamy are extremely rare among primitive
peoples, the assumption is justified that monogamy is one of the
fundamental factors of human civilisation. How could its practically
universal occurrence be explained otherwise? There can be no question of
convergence, nor has a world-wide transmission of a cultural element
that has arisen later been proved up to the present.

The opinion, first expressed by L. H. Morgan, that the classificatory
relationship system is evidence of the existence of group marriage (not
merely in the form of _pirauru_ existing at the side of monogamy), is
contradicted by the etymological meaning of the terms used by primitive
people, which are generally translated by "father," "mother,"
"grandfather," "brother," "sister," "child," etc. These collective names
show nowhere an allusion to procreation, but only to age differences:
father and mother are the "elder," the "big ones," the "grown-ups"; the
children are the "little ones," the "young ones"; brothers and sisters
are the "comrades." We often find that among the Australian negroes and
the South Sea islanders no distinction is made between father and
mother. All persons of an older generation of a horde or a totem (or of
a phratry respectively) are simply the "elder," the "big ones." If a
native wishes to indicate more clearly the sex of a person of an older
class, he must add the word "man" or "woman" (or the adjective "male" or
"female"). It often happens that grandparents and grandchildren use the
same form of address, which in no way refers to descent (Cunow). Other
facts point to the same conclusion. Where the _pirauru_ exists in
Australia, the same form of address is used for persons standing in
_pirauru_ relationship to the speaker as for members of the same age
class who have no such relationship. This could not be so if the
appellation had originated from common sexual relationship. Cunow
rightly concludes: "Sexual communities can be proved to exist here and
there among primitive peoples, but the nomenclature of the
classificatory relationships has not grown out of such group
relationships. These so-called group marriages are rather adventitious
growths, playing only a secondary _rôle_ in the history of the family."

Buschan (1912, p. 254) looks upon the pre-marital sexual freedom of
girls among many primitive peoples (most probably among the majority of
them) as a relic of communal marriage from earlier times. He assumes
that the girls had promiscuous relationships with the other sex. This,
however, is not the case. As a rule, couples meet together for a time,
and only rarely does a person have relationship with several persons at
the same time. The conditions are essentially the same as in Europe,
except that amongst "savages" a love affair going as far as intercourse
is not considered immoral. The assumption of many authors that man is
polygynous is far from being proved, at least not in the sense that the
majority of men are inclined to have relationship with several women at
the same time. It cannot, however, be disputed that after some time the
relationship between two people tends to lose its attraction, often
causing a breaking of the marriage vow.

There is a custom among many peoples that a man's widow falls to his
younger brother (or cousin)--the _levirate_. According to another
custom, a man has the right to marry the sisters of his wife. Both these
customs have been explained as being relics of a form of marriage in
which brothers married several sisters or sisters married brothers at
the same time (Frazer, II., p. 144). But it seems much more likely that
we have here before us merely a case of property rights.

Even if constancy in marriage is not the rule, especially among
primitive people, yet we must still regard the permanent living together
of one man and one woman as a state that has always prevailed amongst
human beings (Westermarck). Many of the speculations, at first sight so
learned, about the apparently intricate paths in the development of
marriage, remain merely speculations which cannot stand the test of
modern ethnological research. Heinrich Schurtz (p. 175) makes the
pertinent remark that nothing excited the hostile camps of the
sociological idealists and naturalists more than the dispute about
promiscuity in primitive times. While the one party painted with zest
the indiscriminate and irregular sex relationship of primitive races,
claiming it as an established original stage in human development, the
adherents of idealism rose in indignation against a theory that places
primitive man far below the level of the higher animals, and that leaves
the riddle unsolved how such a chaos could lead to the idea of sexual
purity and a spiritualisation of the sexual impulse. In this battle for
and against promiscuity even facts were unfortunately too often not
respected, attempts being made to disregard them at any cost. This
cannot be good for the ultimate victory of truth. Facts should not be
passed over, but should be taken into full consideration. In this
conflict of opinions the institution of _pirauru_ especially has fared
particularly badly. Some anthropologists wanted to do away with it
altogether at any price (for instance, Josef Müller); others drew
conclusions from it that are utterly unjustified. But even if this were
not so, even if the _pirauru_ could be used as a proof of previous
sexual promiscuity, it still does not follow that it was a general
custom in man, for the majority of the peoples show no trace of it.

First of all, it must be noticed that even the _pirauru_ possesses
various restrictions upon marriage with persons outside certain groups,
which alone exclude unrestrained promiscuity. Furthermore, individual
marriage, the binding force of which is undoubtedly even stronger and
closer, is well known to exist beside it. There is a good deal of
probability for the assumption of Schurtz that marriage regulations
establishing the right of several men to one wife may first have arisen
from mere friendly acts, or the original sexual licentiousness may have
developed occasionally under specially favourable circumstances into the
institution of _pirauru_, while at other places such a systematic
development did not take place. It is easily to be understood that lower
civilisations will show a looser standard of the marriage bond than
those where many interests of a rich cultural development require the
strengthening of this bond. Sexual needs may also have brought about the
origin of the _pirauru_ institutions. Thus there exist in Australia
tribes among which the loan of wives was customary owing to the scarcity
of women. There is only one step from this state of affairs to the
_pirauru_. Among many tribes complicated marriage restrictions make a
"legitimate" marriage very difficult, and this may easily lead to other
sex relationships taking the place of marriage.

It is a mistake to assume hastily that customs among primitive people
that appear strange to us must therefore be ancient and be relics of a
primitive state. Every primitive race has a long history behind it, and
it is not likely that it has remained static all the time. Primitive
people are not stationary in development; there is much change among
them in the course of generations. This applies also to customs and
habits which seem absolutely stable. External conditions may produce new
developments, or result in foreign influences. Not everything,
therefore, that is peculiar to uncivilised races of the present day must
be looked upon as primitive.

Polyandry deserves our special consideration. As a recognised social
institution it has so far been definitely established only among the
Indian peoples and castes, as well as in Tibet, on the borders of
Northern India. In exceptional cases polyandry occurs among the Eskimos
and the Asiatic Polar races. The older accounts of polyandry occurring
in Australia are not confirmed by the new ethnographical literature. The
reports about polyandry among the American Indians are also incorrect.
John Roscoe (1907, pp. 99 _et seq._) has proved its existence among the
Bahima and Baziba tribes of Central Africa, though here polyandry is not
the rule, but is only practised occasionally. If a man is poor, if he
cannot get together the number of cows required for the bride price, or
if he is unable to support a wife, he can combine with one or several of
his brothers and take a wife in common with them. It is easy to get the
women for this purpose. Furthermore, among these tribes the housewife
may be claimed by a guest, while exchange of wives also occurs.

In India polyandry is prevalent among the peoples of the Himalayan
mountains and among some Southern Indian tribes. Some cases of this
curious form of marriage are already mentioned in the ancient Indian
literature. It may be assumed, therefore, that it was more prevalent
formerly than at present. This institution was certainly never very
general nor of great importance in the life of the people of India. At
the present time it is restricted to a number of comparatively small
tribes and castes. Two forms of polyandry can be distinguished among
them, namely, the fraternal form, where several brothers or cousins have
one wife in common, and the matriarchal form, where a woman has several
husbands, not necessarily related to each other.

In Northern India polyandry is general among the Tibetans and Bhotias of
the Himalayan border districts. Here, when the oldest of several
brothers takes a wife, she has the right--but not the duty--to have
sexual relationship with the other brothers living in the same
household. If a younger brother also marries, the other still younger
brothers have the choice in which household they wish to live. The
surplus women become nuns. This system is said to be due to the poverty
of the country. The Himalayan peoples, being intent on preventing the
increase of the population and a further reduction of the means of
existence, consign many women to celibacy and childlessness. Yet at the
same time they make it possible, by this system, for the socially
privileged man to satisfy his sexual needs. The children of polyandrous
marriages belong, as a rule, legally to the oldest brother. But it also
occurs that each brother in turn, according to his age, has a child
assigned to him regardless of whether the brother concerned was on the
spot at the time of the child's conception. Sometimes the mother has the
right to name the father of each of her children.

Fraternal polyandry also exists in Cashmir and among certain Sudra
castes of the Punjab mountains. In the Punjab, however, the Rajputs and
other castes of that neighbourhood are also influenced by polyandry. The
ceremonies which take place at marriage in the Punjab bear traces of
"marriage by capture." The dwellings of the polyandrous castes of this
district consist of two rooms, one for the woman and one for the group
of brothers. In Tibet, as also among the polyandrous Southern Indians,
they have, however, mostly one room. The surplus women in the Punjab
become objects of commerce. In the native State of Bashar, for instance,
an active export trade is carried on with the surplus women, for whom
sums up to 500 rupees are given.

Among the Dyats in the Punjab, the Gudyars in the United Provinces, as
among all the Hindu castes in the mountain districts of Ambala,
polyandry existed until lately; but it is said not to do so there any
longer. In Ambala not only brothers, but also first cousins, were
considered to be husbands of the oldest brother's wife.

Further, in East India the Santal caste (2,138,000 persons in Bengal,
Bihar and Orissa) is the only community among which a similar custom
exists. Among the Santals not only have the younger brothers access to
the wife of the older brother, but the husband also may have relations
with the younger sisters of his wife. This state of affairs may perhaps
be looked upon as sexual communism among a small group. In Ladakh, too,
and in other places of Cashmir, the wife common to several brothers may
bring with her her sister into the marriage as co-partner. In the Punjab
the fraternal husbands may also marry a second and third wife.

Among Indian migratory labourers it seems to have been formerly the rule
that the brother remaining at home served as a conjugal substitute for
the husband temporarily absent. Nowadays this custom has almost
disappeared.

In Southern India polyandry is a recognised institution among the Toda
and Kurumba of the Nilgiri mountains, as also among a number of the
lower castes, especially on the coast of Malabar. Here polyandry and
polygyny occasionally co-exist side by side.

The polyandry among the Toda has been described in detail by W. H. R.
Rivers. The whole tribe is divided into two endogamous groups, which,
again, are split up into a number of exogamous sub-groups. The husbands
shared in common by a woman are in most cases brothers; they are rarely
other members of the same exogamous group and of the same age class.
When the husbands are brothers, there never ensue any quarrels about
access to the wife. All the brothers are reckoned as fathers of a child.
Yet it often occurs that a Toda only calls one man his father. It is
exclusively external circumstances that are here decisive; often one of
the fathers is more influential and more respected than his brothers,
and naturally the sons prefer to speak of him as their father. If only
one of the fathers is alive, the offspring always describe him as their
father. If the husbands are not real brothers, they live, like these, in
one household, but the children are allotted to single definite fathers.
That man is considered the father of a child who in the seventh month of
the mother's pregnancy has gone with her through the ceremony of the
presentation of bow and arrow (which is also customary in fraternal
polyandry). The husbands may take turns in the practice of this ceremony
at every pregnancy; it results, therefore, frequently that the first two
or three children belong to one and the same man, the other husbands
acquiring formal father-right only at the later births. If the husbands
separate and give up the common household, each one takes with him the
children belonging to him by right of the bow-and-arrow ceremony. As
everywhere else in India, polyandry has fallen into decay among the
Toda. It may happen that several men have in common several wives, or
that of a group of brothers each has his own wife. But polyandry has
remained up to the present time the prevalent form of marriage among
these hill-folk. The surplus girls used formerly to be killed without
exception; and it is certain, says Rivers, that girl infanticide is
still practised to some extent, although the Toda themselves deny this.
It must be noted that child marriage exists among the Toda.

Matriarchal polyandry, which, in contradistinction to fraternal
polyandry, goes with descent through the mother, still occurs among the
Munduvars of the Travancore plateaus, the Nayars in some parts of
Travancore and Cochin, the Western Kallan, and also among some other
Southern Indian communities. Among numerous other races having mother
descent, but not among all, relics of the former existence of
matriarchal polyandry have been established. The secular authorities,
and no less the European missions, are trying hard to exterminate this
form of marriage.

It is difficult to trace any connection between the polyandry in the
north and that in the south of India. It is most probable that this
custom was carried into Southern India by the Tibetan conquerors in
ancient times. Many Southern Indian polyandrous races, like the Toda
and the Nayar, are distinguished from their real Dravidian neighbours by
their more powerful build, lighter colouring, higher noses, etc.
Furthermore, the architecture of the Malabar temples bears traces of
Tibetan influence. The demon masks carved thereon show almost the same
faces as the Tibetan masks. Among the Kallan the tradition of northern
descent has been preserved up to the present time, and they bury their
dead with their faces turned towards the north.


Exogamy is the custom which forbids the choice of partners for marriage
within a certain group, and which has the effect of preventing near
relations from sexual intercourse. It is found very frequently among
primitive people, and is very prevalent, as Sir J. G. Frazer shows in
his book "Totemism and Exogamy." This, however, does in no way justify
the assumption that it was a general stage of civilisation of all
mankind, and that it once existed even in those places where it is not
found to-day.

Although European travellers, colonists and scientists had long been in
contact with coloured races, it was the Scotsman J. F. McLennan who
first discovered the existence of exogamy. He was led to this discovery
by the study of that peculiar marriage custom which consists in the
pretence of forcible bride capture, though the marriage of the couple
concerned has been agreed to by both families beforehand. McLennan
tried to find an explanation for this custom, and came to the conclusion
that capture of women, which only took place in pretence, must once have
been practised in reality to a large extent. In searching for facts
confirmatory of this assumption, he was struck by the fact that among
savage and barbarous people the men married women not of their own, but
of another, tribal group. He described this as "exogamy," in
contradistinction to "endogamy," by which marriage partners are
restricted in their choice to their own group. In a tribe or other
social group both sexual arrangements may exist side by side, in such a
manner that the tribe is closely endogamous and is divided into several
exogamous groups.

The theory put forward by McLennan as an explanation of the origin of
exogamy is very simple and on superficial examination very convincing.
He assumed that exogamy arose from a scarcity of women, which forced men
to obtain wives by capture from other groups and thus gradually led to a
general preference for strange women. The cause of this assumed scarcity
of women was considered to be the infanticide of new-born females, which
was carried on systematically, for savage people foresaw that in the
struggle for existence it would be a hindrance to have a great number of
women, who could take no share in the battle with enemies, and who
presumably would contribute less to the food supply than the men.

H. Cunow also traces back the origin of exogamy to the scarcity of
women and wife capture. He starts from the assumption that among the
Australian and other uncivilised races the number of persons in a horde
is very limited. "If one assumes that the number of members of a horde
is sixty, the youngest class would contain, according to present-day
reckoning, about twenty-five persons, the middle class twenty, and the
oldest class about fifteen persons. In the middle class there would,
therefore, be only about ten women. Among these a young man entering the
middle class would often not find a single woman that he could take for
his wife, for, after pairing marriage had become general, the few
existing women had already found a spouse; they had already been
disposed of. There was nothing left for the young man but to capture a
woman from a strange horde as soon as possible, or to try to persuade a
comrade of the same age class to let him share in his marriage
relationship on the understanding that his hunting bag would contribute
towards the 'household of the three.' This multiple conjugal partnership
is customary among most of the Australian tribes even to-day." To this
it must be added that the man needs to show much less consideration for
a captured strange woman than for one of his own tribe, who would run
away if badly treated. Nor can the young man remain single, for he
himself would then have to drag his property about, which would hinder
him in the hunt and expose him to the ridicule of his companions. (In
reality there are many unmarried men even in Australia.) The search for
wives led ultimately, according to Cunow, to wife capture and exogamy.

Infanticide, which McLennan assumes, is at present a rare exception
among primitive people. Almost all explorers praise their great love for
children, and even malformed children are not always killed. Even where
infanticide does occur, the sex of the child is certainly not the factor
that decides whether it is to be killed or not. The assumption that
scarcity of women is brought about by girl infanticide is not correct.
The female sex is, indeed, in the minority among uncivilised natives
where they have been counted; but the excess of men is only small.
Mutual capture of women could not alter this disparity, for it is
unlikely that some tribes permitted the capture of their women without
retaliation. Besides, even among primitive people men are careful in
risking their lives. Capture of women is, therefore, nowhere the rule,
but is everywhere the exception. Had it been the rule anywhere, the
continuous fighting would have led to the extermination of the tribes in
question. Frazer is right when he says: "If women are scarce in a group,
many men will prefer to remain single rather than expose themselves to
the danger of death by trying to capture women from their neighbours."
This is what really happened among many tribes of the Australian natives
who lived on a friendly footing with each other. It even happens that
the old men who claim the women expressly forbid the young men to steal
women from other tribes, because that will lead to bloodshed. Further,
scarcity of women is most likely overcome, as previously mentioned, by
several men's sharing one wife, which arrangement, unlike the capture of
women, avoids arousing the hostility of neighbours. Among peaceable
tribes, therefore, a numerical preponderance of men results not in
exogamy, but in polyandry. But admitting that a warlike tribe has not
sufficient women and therefore captures them from their neighbours, it
is still unexplainable why the men should altogether avoid sexual
relationship with their own women, few as they are, and have no desire
for them whatsoever. This will certainly not be the result; on the
contrary, the few women obtainable without force will be all the more in
demand.

Frazer thinks that the origin of exogamy has been rightly explained by
the American ethnologist L. H. Morgan, who for many years lived among
the exogamic Indians as one of them, and thus came into direct contact
with exogamy. Morgan assumed that sexual promiscuity was general at a
very early period in the history of mankind, and that exogamy was
instituted for the deliberate purpose of preventing cohabitation between
blood relations, particularly between brothers and sisters, as was
previously customary. This struck promiscuity at the root; it removed
its worst peculiarity, and resulted at the same time in a powerful
movement towards the establishment of sexual monogamy.

Frazer, in supporting Morgan's theory, relies exclusively on the
Australian natives, who, according to him, though extremely primitive
savages, "carry out the principle of exogamy with a practical
astuteness, logical thoroughness, and precision such as no other race
shows in its marriage system."

Frazer finds that the effects of the Australian marriage class system
are in complete harmony with the deeply rooted convictions and feelings
of the natives as regards sexual intercourse, and concludes that the
successive tribal subdivisions have been brought about deliberately in
order to avoid marriage of blood relations. According to him, it is not
going too far to assert that "no other human institution bears the stamp
of deliberate purpose more clearly than the exogamous classes of the
Australians. To assume that they serve only accidentally the purpose
that they actually fulfil, and which is approved by them unreservedly,
would be to test our credulity nearly as much as if we were told that
the complicated mechanism of a watch has originated without human
design."

Nearly all Australian tribes have the system of division into marriage
classes. Every tribe consists of two main groups (called in
ethnographical literature phratries or moieties), and each of these
groups is again divided into two, four, or eight classes. Sometimes the
phratries and classes have special names, but not always. In the latter
case it may be assumed that the names have been lost, while the division
of the tribes into marriage groups remains. These groups are strictly
exogamous. In no case are the members of the main group of the tribe
(phratry) or of the same class allowed to marry each other. Only members
of two given classes may marry, and their children are again assigned to
given classes. Among some of the tribes there exists paternal descent,
among others maternal descent. Which of the two modes of descent
prevails in Australia can hardly be determined. Among some tribes
property is inherited in the female line. Other rights of the female sex
connected with mother descent are unknown. An example of the Australian
marriage classes is given here, namely, that of the tribe Warrai, who
live on the railway line running from Port Darwin to the south. Among
this tribe indirect paternal descent is the custom; _i.e._, the children
belong to the main group (phratry) of the father, but to other marriage
classes.


      Phratry I.   |   Phratry II.
     --------------+----------------
      Adshumbitch  |   Apungerti
     *Aldshambitch |  *Alpungerti
     --------------+----------------
      Apularan     |   Auinmitch
     *Alpularan    |  *Alinmitch


The female marriage classes are marked with an asterisk.

Each member of a certain male marriage class may only marry a member of
a marriage class of the other phratry, placed opposite in the table.
Thus, for instance, an Adshumbitch man marries an Alpungerti woman, an
Apungerti man an Aldshambitch woman, etc. The children always belong to
the phratry of the men, but to another marriage group of theirs. Thus,
for instance, the boys born from the union of an Adshumbitch man with an
Apungerti woman belong to the Apularan class, and the girls born of this
marriage belong to the Alpularan class. Further complications arise in
consequence of the totem system, which exists among most of the
Australian tribes. As the local groups of a tribe are numerically weak
and consist of members of all marriage classes, the choice of mates is
restricted to quite a small number of persons, being further limited to
a great extent by the marriage of girls in childhood. But even when
adults marry, they can rarely decide according to their own will, but
are dependent on the circumstances of relationship. On the northern
coast of Australia the marriage class system does not exist, but exogamy
exists there, the members of certain local groups not being allowed to
marry each other. The now extinct tribes in the south-east of the
continent also had no marriage class system.

But it still remains a mystery how it was found out that marriages of
blood relations were harmful. One objection is, that some of the
Australians are ignorant of the process of generation; they do not even
know that pregnancy is the result of cohabitation. It is also doubtful
whether the Australian natives can in any case be considered as typical
representatives of primitive man. If this were so, all mankind would
still be in a very low state of civilisation, for the Australians appear
incapable of progressive development. And further, if exogamous classes
were purposely instituted in order to prevent cohabitation between blood
relations, how is it that other people also are excluded from sexual
intercourse who are not blood relations? Frazer's comparison with a
watch is also badly chosen. We must take into consideration the
intellectual stage of development of mankind at the time when exogamy
arose, and when the watch was invented. Even if we do not admit that
exogamy was instituted with a conscious purpose, this does not by any
means, as Frazer says, do away altogether with will and purpose from the
history of human institutions. There is no need to doubt that the
Australian system of exogamy became more and more complicated through
the deliberate action of man.

Frazer himself assumes that the Australians had an aversion to
cohabitation between brothers and sisters even before it was definitely
fixed by binding rules. Sexual aversion between parents and children,
according to him, is universal among them, whether there be in vogue the
two-, four- or eight-classes system, _i.e._, whether incest between
parents and children is expressly forbidden or not. "In democratic
societies like those of the Australian natives, the law sanctions only
thoughts that have already been long the mental possession of the
majority of people." Hence the agreement of the marriage class system
with the feelings of the people becomes explainable.

Since the aversion to sexual intercourse within certain classes was
already in existence before the formation of marriage classes, the
classificatory system being merely the formal expression of it, we have
to find some explanation for it. For the appearance of this aversion
marks the real beginning of exogamy, which cannot be explained by the
complicated system of the Australians. It is possible that the sexual
aversion towards blood relations is already a characteristic trait of
the human race before its truly human development, and that it may have
to be looked upon as an instinct. This is the opinion of F. Hellwald,
which has also been upheld of late by A. E. Crawley. It is assumed that
among brothers and sisters, as among boys and girls who have lived
together from childhood, the pairing instinct generally remains in
abeyance, because the conditions are wanting that are likely to awaken
this instinct. Courting the favour of a person of the other sex is the
process that gradually brings about the sexual excitement necessary for
union. The possibility of sexual excitation between people who have
lived together from childhood is decidedly lessened through habituation,
if not completely inhibited. In this respect brothers and sisters reach
already at puberty that state towards each other to which people married
for a long time approach gradually, through the constant living
together and the exhaustion of youthful passion. If brother and sister
sometimes show passion for each other, it is generally the result of the
same circumstances that are necessary to arouse it under normal
conditions, _e.g._, a long separation. As the absence of sexual
attraction between brother and sister who have grown up together is a
natural thing, it is strange that cohabitation between them should have
to be specially prohibited and enforced by strict measures among
primitive peoples. The explanation, according to Crawley, is simple. "In
many departments of primitive life we find a naïve desire to, as it
were, assist Nature, to affirm what is normal and later to confirm it by
the categorical imperative of custom and law. This tendency still
flourishes in our civilised communities, and, as the worship of the
normal, is often a deadly foe to the abnormal and eccentric, and too
often paralyses originality. Laws thus made, and with this object, have
some justification, and their existence may be due, in some small
measure, to the fact that abnormality increases _pari passu_ with
culture. But it is a grave error to ascribe a prevalence of incest to
the period preceding the law against it." All the facts tend to show
that the most primitive people procured their wives by friendly
arrangements. From this standpoint it would be most practical if each
tribe were divided into two groups, the men of each group marrying wives
from the other group. This state of affairs is actually to be found
among many uncivilised peoples that are divided into two exogamous
groups or phratries. It has still to be discovered how this bipartition
arose. It is unthinkable that a division into two groups was
intentionally brought about by the members of the groups for the purpose
of preventing marriages between blood relations of a certain grade. No
tribe has ever been divided in such a manner; the division must
therefore be explainable in another way. The phratries are large
families (in the broad sense of the word); they descend from families
(in the narrower sense of the word), reciprocally supplying each other
with wives. The names of the phratries are generally unintelligible, in
contradistinction to the names of the totem groups, and therefore most
probably older. The totem groups, of which a phratry consists, are to be
considered as younger branches of the original double family, which have
arisen through wives being taken from other groups whose children again
received the name of their mothers. If it should be asked why the
members of two phratries should constantly intermarry, it should be
pointed out that among communities in the lowest stage of civilisation
women are not easily procurable, and the force of external circumstances
would favour the unions just mentioned (Crawley, pp. 54 _et seq._).

A biological explanation of the origin of exogamy is given by Herbert
Risley. Without basing it on the assumption that primitive people have a
knowledge of the harmfulness of incest, he gives the following
exposition: "Exogamy can be brought under the law of natural selection
without extending it too far. We know that among individuals or groups
of individuals there exists a tendency to vary in their instincts, and
that useful variations (such as are suitable to the conditions of life)
tend to be preserved and transmitted by inheritance. Let us assume now
that in a primitive community the men varied in the direction towards
choosing wives from another community, and that this infusion of fresh
blood was advantageous. The original instinct would then be strengthened
by inheritance, and sexual selection would be added in the course of
time. For an exogamous group would have a greater choice of women than
an endogamous one, ... and in the competition for women the best would
fall to the strongest and most warlike men. In this way the strengthened
exogamous groups would in time exterminate the endogamous neighbours, or
at least take away their best marriageable maidens. Exogamy would spread
partly through imitation, partly through the extermination of endogamous
groups. The fact that we cannot explain how it came about that the
people varied in the aforesaid direction is not fatal to this
hypothesis. We do not doubt natural selection in the case of animals
because we cannot give the exact cause of a favourable variation."

E. Westermarck holds a similar theory about the cessation of incest. He
thinks that "among the ancestors of man, as among other animals, there
was, no doubt, a time when blood relationship was no bar to sexual
intercourse. But variations here, as elsewhere, would naturally present
themselves; and those of our ancestors who avoided in-and-in breeding
would survive, while the others would gradually decay and ultimately
perish. Thus an instinct would be developed which would be powerful
enough, as a rule, to prevent injurious unions. Of course it would
display itself simply as an aversion on the part of individuals to union
with others with whom they lived; but these, as a matter of fact, would
be blood relations, so that the result would be the survival of the
fittest. Whether man inherited the feeling from the predecessors from
whom he sprang, or whether it was developed after the evolution of
distinctly human qualities, we do not know. It must necessarily have
arisen at a stage when family ties became comparatively strong, and
children remained with their parents until the age of puberty or even
longer."

It may be surmised that the impulse towards the appearance of the
exogamous tendency arose through economic progress, which led to an
increase of the means of existence, and this in its turn produced a more
friendly relationship between neighbouring groups that previously had
quarrelled about food. The men thus came into contact with strange
women, and this awakened a heightened sexual feeling, in other words the
instinct which is said to have led to the avoidance of incest. Thus
among the peoples on a very low economic level (_e.g._, the Pigmies) no
laws for the prevention of incest are to be found, a fact that may be
held to confirm this idea. Primitive people could in any case not
understand the harmfulness of incest, while it is certain that strange
members of the opposite sex could exert a stronger attraction, and thus
render the sexual impulse permanent, which previously was periodical, as
among the animals.




V

BIRTH AND FETICIDE


The slow increase in the population of primitive peoples, which is also
to be noticed wherever the conditions of life have not been influenced
by European settlers and missionaries, is chiefly due to the want of
proper midwifery, and no less to the frequent practice of abortion. The
opinion is often met with, particularly in older writings, that among
primitive people childbirth is extremely easy. But more extended
knowledge has shown how dangerous childbirth is for the primitive mother
also. Though childbirth is a natural physiological process, it does not
always pass off quite without danger, no less under natural conditions
than among highly civilised peoples. Primitive people know full well
that the hour of childbirth is the hardest time in a woman's life, but
not all have progressed far enough in the knowledge of physiology to be
able to render efficient assistance to the woman in labour. Some people
leave her, incredible as it may seem to us, without any assistance,
either through indifference to life or through a superstitious fear of
the mystery of life. Such cases are, however, very rare exceptions.
Sometimes means are used for furthering the birth that are not only
inefficacious, but actually injurious. Often, however, delivery is
actually furthered by the assistance given. Internal manipulation is
seldom resorted to, and operations are still more rare. R. W. Felkin's
report about the operation of Cæsarian section among the negroes in
Uganda seems to be unique. Ploss and Bartels have compiled a great deal
of information about childbirth among primitive people. We add here some
examples from the later literature.

Feticide occurs most likely among all primitive peoples to a larger or
lesser degree, and injures them accordingly. The reasons are the same as
with us: inability to support a large number of children or aversion to
the worries of child-rearing. Unmarried girls procure abortion usually
because the child might be a hindrance to a future marriage,
particularly when the father of the expected child jilts the mother.
Still pre-marital births are not always considered a disgrace among
primitive people. The abortives resorted to are generally inefficacious,
though some native peoples have discovered really effective remedies.
Külz (p. 18) says quite rightly, "It is to be assumed that woman
everywhere, even in a low state of civilisation, has her attention
directed to the occurrence of involuntary premature birth by often
recurring effective causes. Such external causes are not very remote
from the mechanically and medically produced abortions. We only need to
think of the fact that among all primitive peoples the chief work in the
fields falls to the women, and that it is just heavy labour that has the
tendency to interrupt pregnancy. It required only some little thought
to discover this frequently observed coincidence and to learn from the
involuntary interruption of pregnancy how to produce it voluntarily....
In the same way the production of abortions by poisons can easily be
derived from a rational application of chance remedies producing
corresponding involuntary effects.... Just as primitive man discovered
many medicinal plants by repeatedly partaking of them, so he also found
out the specific use of some of these for feticide. This could happen
the more readily as among abortive remedies in use there were many that
in a way served him as food and condiment, such as nutmeg, or the papaia
kernels, or others that he used at the same time for poisoning fish, or
others, again, like the aperient _Cajanus indicus_, which in moderate
doses acts medicinally, in large doses, however, as an abortive."

The use of poisons and mechanical feticide not only brings about
limitation of offspring, but often results in the death of the mother.
Where they are very prevalent they contribute greatly to the scarcity of
women, with all its attendant biological disadvantages. The contact of
primitive people with Europeans generally increases the frequency of
abortions. This is due partly to the desire for hiding the results of
sexual intercourse with strangers, partly to the incitement to loose
living which the acquaintance with European culture sometimes brings
about.

How defective the state of midwifery is among primitive people is shown
by many accounts in newer works of ethnology. Thus the missionary Endle
writes (p. 41): "The native tribes of Assam and Burma have no special
midwives. Every old woman may perform the duties of a midwife, and she
does it without payment. There is no information about the treatment of
the woman during parturition. The navel cord is generally cut off with a
bamboo knife. The Katshári do not perform this with one cut, but make
five cuts in the case of a boy and seven for a girl. The mother is
considered unclean for several weeks after her confinement. This is also
the case among many races of Southern and Eastern Asia, and in other
parts of the world. Isolation even before the confinement sometimes
occurs, and is due to the belief that women in this state are unclean."

Among the savage tribes of Formosa the birth of a child passes off so
lightly that the lying-in woman is able to go on with her work on the
following day. She only avoids heavy labour in the field for a month.
After the birth certain superstitious ceremonies, according to old
customs, are performed, such as driving away the devil, etc. Among many
tribes twins are held to be a misfortune, and the second child is
therefore killed. This also occurs frequently in other places (W.
Müller, p. 230).

Among the Igorots of Bontoc (Philippines) the woman works in the field
almost to the hour of her confinement. There are no festivities or
ceremonies connected with the birth. The father of the child, if he is
the husband of the woman, is present, as is also the woman's mother, but
no one else. The parturient woman bends her body strongly forward,
holding firmly on to the beam of the house, or she takes up an
animal-like position, so that hands and feet are on the ground.
Medicines and baths are not resorted to for hastening the labour pains,
but the people present massage the abdomen of the labouring woman. About
ten days after the birth her body is washed with warm water. There is no
special diet, but the mother refrains from field work for two or three
months. If twins are born, it is believed to be due to an evil spirit
who has had connection with the woman whilst she was asleep. No blame is
attached to the mother, but the quieter of the children (and when both
children are quiet, the longer one) is buried alive near the house
immediately after birth. Abortion is practised by married women as well
as by single girls, if for some reason the child is not wanted. The
mother warns her unmarried daughter against abortion, telling her that a
girl who produces abortion will not get a faithful husband, but will
become the common partner of several men. The foetus is driven off in
the second month of pregnancy by hot baths and massage. Abortion is not
considered a disgrace (Jenks).

Among the Kayan of Borneo there are everywhere older women who serve as
midwives. One of them is called in good time to the pregnant woman. She
examines her abdomen from time to time, and pretends to be able to give
the child the right position. She hangs some magical remedies about the
living room, and applies various remedies externally. The pregnant woman
follows her usual occupation until the labour pains commence. Then the
midwife and other old relatives or friends assist her. The husband may
also remain in the room, but he is prevented by a screen from seeing the
parturient woman, who gets hold tightly of a cloth hung over or in front
of her. The pains are generally of short duration, rarely lasting more
than two or three hours. In order to prevent the rising of the child,
the women bind a cloth tightly round the abdomen of the parturient
woman, and two of them press firmly on the womb on either side. After
the delivery of the child the navel cord is cut with a bamboo knife. If
the after-birth does not follow soon, the women become anxious; two of
them lift up the patient, and if that has no result, the navel cord is
fastened to an axe in order to prevent it from re-entering the body, and
presumably also to hasten the delivery of the after-birth. Internal
manipulations are not resorted to. The after-birth is buried. If the
child is born with a caul, the caul is dried, pounded into powder, and
used in later years as medicine for the child. If the labour pains are
exceptionally severe or long-lasting, or if an accident happens, the
news travels rapidly. Everybody is overcome by fear, as the death of a
parturient woman is particularly dreaded. The men and the boys take
flight. If death actually ensues, most of the men remain in hiding for
some time, and the corpse is quickly buried by old men and women who are
least afraid of death.

The pregnant women of the Punan of Borneo continue with their usual work
until the arrival of labour pains, and they resume it immediately after
the confinement. To assist delivery the body is tightly bound above the
womb. Nothing further is known about special help (Hose and McDougall,
II., pp. 154, 185).

The Papua women are said to give birth easily, as a rule, but difficult
deliveries and fatal cases do occur exceptionally. The custom exists in
various places for the mother to throw the after-birth into the river or
the sea after confinement (Williamson, p. 178; Seligmann, p. 85). Of the
Mafulu Williamson says that when the after-birth is thrown into the
river the mother gives the new-born child some water to drink. If the
child partakes of it, it is considered a good omen; otherwise the child
is believed not to be viable and is drowned. Williamson thinks that the
purpose of this custom is to enable the mother to choose whether she
wishes to keep the child alive or not. It also may happen that a
childless woman accompanies the mother to the river and there adopts the
child. Wilful abortion also occurs very often, not only in single girls,
but also in married women, who thus keep their families small.

Among the Barriai in New Pomerania the woman is confined whilst sitting
on a log of wood, being massaged from above downwards by an older woman.
The husband is not allowed to be present. The birth generally passes off
quite easily. The navel cord is cut off with an obsidian knife. The
parents may not eat pork and certain kinds of fish until the child has
begun to walk. Disregard of this prohibition is believed to bring about
the death of the child. The parents abstain also during this time from
sexual intercourse. Abortives do not seem to be known, though
miscarriages sometimes occur through the rough treatment of pregnant
women by men (Friederici, p. 89). In Polynesia abortion is generally
produced by women professionally. This is brought about by the use of
certain foods or drinks, by the application of mechanical means, etc.
How widespread feticide is in Melanesia can be seen from a statement of
Parkinson, according to whom in New Mecklenburg quite young girls make
no secret of having produced abortion three or four times. Among the
Jabim (Finschhafen) the mothers present their daughters with abortives
when they get married (Buschan, I., p. 62).

On the eastern islands of the Torres Straits (Australia) the women chew
as a prevention of pregnancy the leaves of Callicarpa, or of a Eugenia
species called _sobe_, also the leaves of a large shrub called _bok_;
but these remedies are inefficacious. Medicines and mechanical methods
are used for abortion. Among the former are the leaves of the
convolvulus, of Clerodendron, _Pouzolzia microphylla_, _Macaranga
tanarius_, _Terminala catappa_, Eugenia, _Hibiscus tiliaceus_, and
Callicarpa. If these do not help, the abdomen is beaten with large
stones, with a rope or twigs or a wand, or a heavy load is put on it.
Sometimes the woman leans with her back against a tree, and two men
grasp a wand and press it against her abdomen, so as to bring about the
delivery of the foetus. This often results in the death of the mother.

On the Easter Island, in the Eastern Pacific Ocean, there were several
men with a knowledge of midwifery, but recently only one of them has
survived. Nowadays older women act as midwives. Walter Knoche writes
(1912, pp. 659 _et seq._): "The birth takes place either in the open or
in the house, the woman standing with legs spread out, or recently in a
sitting position. The accoucheur stands behind the parturient woman,
embracing her abdomen. The thumbs are spread out, and touch each other
in a horizontal position somewhat above the navel, while the remainder
of the hand is turned diagonally downwards. In this way massage is
applied by a slow, rhythmical, strong and kneading movement vertically
from above downwards. When the birth is sufficiently advanced, the child
is drawn out; the assistant bites off the navel cord (among some
Brazilian Indian tribes the husband does this, but on the Easter Island
he takes no part in the delivery); then a knot is made a few centimetres
from the navel. The after-birth is not specially dealt with; it is
buried. The navel cord, however, is placed in a calabash, which is
buried or put under a rock. After the event the lying-in woman lies down
upon a mat in the house, and warm, flat, fairly heavy stones are applied
to the abdomen. Perhaps this is the reason why even women who have had
difficult confinements still preserve a good figure. The infant remains
at the mother's breast for about a year." Knoche also heard that the
women sometimes pass a piece of an alga into the vulva right up to the
womb before intercourse with a stranger, believing this method to be a
very safe one. It could, unfortunately, not be ascertained whether this
precaution was formerly, as seems likely, resorted to generally in order
to limit the number of children, or whether its use was only intended to
keep the tribe untainted by foreign blood. The latter assumption is
contradicted by the fact that "the Easter Island women have children
from strangers living for some time on the Easter Island, and that
nowadays the use of contraceptives in the case of strangers who come and
go quickly may simply be due to the circumstance that at the birth of a
child there would be no man to support it. It is most probable that the
use of preventives had its origin in Malthusian principles. The little
island, whose population has been variously estimated by travellers of
the eighteenth and the first half of the nineteenth century at a few
thousand, must herewith have reached its maximum number of inhabitants,
which could of necessity not be exceeded. Deaths and births had
therefore to balance. This employment of contraceptives in Polynesia is
unique, and it may be truly reckoned as a sign of a higher civilisation,
together with other facts, such as the existence of a script, of stone
houses and of large stone idols, the Moai, which have made this lonely
little island so famous. On the other Oceanic Islands, as, for instance,
on the westward-situated Tahiti, infanticide, committed by the mother as
many as ten times in succession, served to limit the number of children,
either on account of economy or for reasons of convenience.
Contraceptives are otherwise unknown in Oceania."

Of the Jao in East Africa Karl Weule relates (p. 61): "During the
delivery the parturient woman lies upon her back on a mat on the floor
of the hut. The older children and the husband are not allowed to be
present, but a number of older women are there, amongst whom there is
always a near relative of the husband, who takes special note of any
evidence of extra-marital intercourse given by the parturient woman. It
is the chief business of the midwives to submit the woman to a very
strict _questionnaire_: 'How many men have you had, three, or four, or
even more? Your child will not come until you have mentioned the right
father. Yes, you will die, if you do not tell us how many men you have
had.' Such speeches are hurled at the woman from all sides. No
mechanical help is given her. She rolls about in pain, under great
bodily and mental torture, and shrieks and cries until all is over. The
navel cord is cut off by an old woman. Ancient instruments, such as are
used by the East African Bantu tribes, are unknown among the Jao. The
cutting of the navel cord seems to be performed clumsily, for umbilical
rupture, which has become an ideal of beauty in many places in Eastern
Africa, is here frequent. The after-birth and the navel cord are buried,
if possible without a witness. They are considered effective magical
remedies. The new-born child is washed and then wrapped in a cloth or a
piece of bark fabric. A real lying-in is not kept up; the mother gets up
again the same or the following day. Sex intercourse can only be resumed
again with the permission of the village elder. It is only given when
the child can sit up, or when it is six or seven months old. Children
are welcome; twins are no less joyfully received. But infanticide is
said to occur. If, however, children are not wanted, married women as
well as girls resort to abortion. Plant juices are generally used for
this purpose, though sometimes mechanical means are resorted to.
Abortion is in no way considered reprehensible. In order to prevent
conception, the woman puts herself into communication with a _fundi_,
who understands something of making knots. The _fundi_ goes into the
wood, seeks out two different barks, and twists them together into a
cord. Into the cord he rubs the yolk of an egg, for to the Jao the curse
of infertility abides in the egg. He knots into the cord three knots,
saying at the same time, 'You tree are called thus and thus, and you
thus; but you egg, you become a living animal. But now I do not want
anything living.' He then twists the final knot. This cord is worn by
the woman round her body. Boots are also placed under her head at night
to prevent conception. If the woman wishes to become pregnant again, she
needs only to untie the knots in the cord, to put it into water, and
then drink the water. Afterwards the cord is thrown away."

Among the Makua, on the Makonda plateau in East Africa, at the first
sign of labour pains the woman lies down upon her back on a mat in the
house. A cloth is put under her back by the helping women, which is
drawn tightly and pulled up when the pains become stronger. After the
birth the navel cord is cut, not with a knife, but with a splinter from
a millet stalk. Here, as in other phases in the life of man, an ancient
implement has survived for sacred purposes long after the period of its
common use. The navel cord is not tied, but dries off. The removed part
is buried. The lying-in woman remains at home three or four days.

Among the Masai an old woman is always called in as midwife. If the
birth goes on normally, no superstitious or useless operations are
undertaken (Merker, pp. 189 _et seq._). Should an increase of labour
pains appear necessary, the parturient woman is led round by the women
for a few steps, and if this does not produce the desired result light
massage is applied. Only when these remedies prove to be inefficacious
an extreme step is taken: the labouring woman is slowly lifted up by her
feet by several women until her body hangs perpendicularly and her head
touches the ground, whereupon the midwife massages the body in the
direction of the navel. Medicaments are seldom used for hastening the
delivery. Internal manual or operative manipulations do not seem to be
practised anywhere. In the case of a narrow pelvis preventing birth, no
help is available; mother and child perish. The confinement takes place
on all fours or in a sitting position; in the latter case the legs and
the back are pressed against the posts of the hut. For the production of
abortion a decoction of dried goat dung or of _cordia quarensis_ or some
other remedy is used.

Of the Hottentots it has sometimes been reported that the women have
easy births. According to Schulze's inquiries (p. 218), this is not
always the case. The birth takes place in the side position. During very
difficult births the women attempt to widen the vulva of the parturient
woman. If that does not help, the perineum is deliberately torn up to
the anus. No attempt is made to cure the perineal tear, for the belief
exists that it would hinder the passage of the next child. All
manipulations are carried out beneath the skin rug under which the woman
lies. The navel cord is cut without delay; no one troubles about the
delivery of the after-birth. The woman resumes her occupation generally
on the seventh or eighth day. Feticide is not unusual among the
Hottentots. A hot decoction of badger urine, drunk, if necessary, for
several days in succession, is considered an effective abortive remedy.
The procedure itself is characteristically called "drinking and falling"
(Schulze, p. 320).

Among the Uti-Krag Indians of the Rio Doce (Espirito Santo, Brazil) the
woman goes through the labour alone. She disappears in the bush, and
herself bites off the navel cord; after the delivery she goes to the
nearest stream to wash herself and the child, and rejoins her tribe
immediately (Walter Knoche, 1913, p. 397).

Among the Indians of the Aiary, when a woman is taken with labour pains
all the men leave their house, which is common to several families. The
woman lies in her hammock in her part of the house, which is securely
closed by a lattice railing. All the women remain with her and help at
the birth. The navel cord and after-birth are buried immediately on the
spot. After the birth the mother and the child remain strictly secluded
for five days. The husband remains in the house during the lying-in
period, but there is no real _couvade_ (the male lying-in custom).

The women of the Kobéua Indians give birth in the common family house,
or in an outlying hut, or even in the wood, with the assistance of all
married women, who first paint their faces red for the festive occasion.
The navel cord is cut off by the husband's mother with a blade of
scleria grass, and is immediately buried, together with the
after-birth. Of twins the second born is killed, or the female if they
are of different sexes. After the birth, the witch doctor performs
exorcism. The parents keep up a five days' lying-in, and eight days
after the birth a drinking feast is held (Koch-Grünberg, I., p. 182;
II., p. 146).

Among the Bakairi of Brazil, according to Karl von den Steinen (p. 334),
abortion is said to occur frequently. The women are afraid of the
confinement. They prepare for it by drinking tea, and mechanical
measures are also resorted to. The women are delivered on the floor in a
kneeling position, holding firmly to a post. The hammocks must not be
soiled. Women who have had experience declared with emphasis, and showed
by pantomime, that the pains were great. But they soon get up and go to
work, the husband going through the famous _couvade_ (the man's
lying-in), keeping strict diet, not touching his weapons and passing the
greatest part of his time in his hammock. He only leaves the house to
satisfy his physical needs, and lives completely on a thin _pogu_,
manioc cake crumbled into water. There exists the belief that anything
else might injure the child, as if the child itself ate meat, fish or
fruit. The _couvade_ only ends when the remainder of the navel cord
falls off.

Among the Bororo, according to the same author (p. 503), the woman is
delivered in the wood. The father cuts the navel cord with a bamboo
splinter, and ties it with a thread. For two days the parents do not
eat anything, and on the third day they may only partake of some warm
water. If the man were to eat he and the child would become ill. The
after-birth is buried in the wood. The woman is not allowed to bathe
until the reappearance of menstruation; but then, as generally after
menstruation, she does it frequently. Abortion by the help of internal
means is said to be frequent, especially among the Ranchao women. If the
mother wishes to stop suckling, they squeeze the breasts out, and "dry
the milk over the fire, whereupon it keeps away." Medicine for sick
children, which the chemist had prepared, was swallowed by the parents,
as among the Bakairi.

Among the Paressi the woman is confined in a kneeling position, being
held by her mother under her breast. The _couvade_ is also customary
among them.




VI

IGNORANCE OF THE PROCESS OF GENERATION


The mentality of the different branches of mankind varies a great deal.
A good example of this is the fact that there are peoples who do not
know the connection between cohabitation and conception. There are other
tribes, again, who, as we have reason to assume, did not possess this
knowledge previously. In fact, Ferdinand von Reitzenstein thinks that
there was a time when the connection between cohabitation and pregnancy
was unknown to all mankind, and he adduces examples which show that
traces of such a state are to be found in the legends and customs of
many peoples. And, says von Reitzenstein, we need hardly be surprised at
this ignorance of the generative process when we consider that "it is
only since the days of Swammerdam, who died in 1685, that we know that
both egg and spermatozoon have to come together for fertilisation, and
only since Du Barry (1850) that we know that the spermatozoon must
penetrate the egg." The belief in supernatural conception has been
preserved, not only in the Christian Churches, but also in the myths of
the gods in most religions. Originally man could not conclude from the
mere appearance of a pregnant woman that the cohabitation which had
occurred months ago was the cause of her condition. Primitive people do
not bring into causal connection phenomena separated by wide intervals.

Von Reitzenstein writes that primitive people, who generally marry their
girls before the advent of puberty, must have been turned aside from
seeing the connection between cohabitation and pregnancy because these
girls had no children at first in spite of having sexual intercourse.
But to this it may be objected that even the lowest races must have
noticed that pregnancy only occurs after the advent of the first
menstruation. The appearance and abeyance of menstruation must have
formed a step towards the understanding of the generative process. It is
otherwise with von Reitzenstein's objection that by far the largest
number of cohabitations do not lead to pregnancy. Even among
comparatively enlightened races this observation led to the assumption
that some additional supernatural process is necessary for
fertilisation. Among the Australians, the least developed race of man,
the necessity of cohabitation for pregnancy is totally unknown. Baldwin
Spencer and Frank J. Gillen have shown (1899, pp. 123 _et seq._; 1904,
pp. 145, 606) that among the natives of Northern and Central Australia
there exists the general belief that the children penetrate into the
woman as minute spirits. These spirits are said to come from persons
that have lived once before and are reborn in this manner. The belief in
rebirth, together with the ignorance of the generative process, is very
widespread in Australia, _e.g._, among many tribes in Queensland, in
Southern Australia, in the Northern Territory and in Western Australia.
It is now too late to get reliable information in this matter from those
parts of Australia where the natives are in regular contact with whites.
Spencer takes it as certain that the belief in asexual propagation was
once general in Australia.

Among all those tribes by whom this belief has been preserved up to the
present the traditions concerning the tribal ancestors are quite
definite. Among the Arunta, for instance, who live in the district of
the transcontinental telegraph line between Charlotte Waters and the
McDonnel mountains, and among whom ignorance of the process of
generation was first discovered, there exists the tradition that in
bygone times, called _altcheringa_, the male and female ancestors of the
tribe carried spirit children about with them, which they put down in
certain places. These spirit children, like the spirits of the tribal
ancestors, themselves enter into the women and are borne by them. The
Arunta believe that at the death of a person his spirit returns to a
special tree or rock, out of which it came, and which is called
_nandcha_. It remains there until it thinks fit once more to enter into
a woman, and thus go amongst the living. All these spirits are called
_iruntarinia_. But before the first rebirth of an _iruntarinia_ there
arose another spirit from the _nandcha_, which is the double of the
_iruntarinia_, and is called _arumburinga._ This _arumburinga_ never
becomes embodied, but remains always a spirit, which accompanies its
human representative whenever inclined, and, as a rule, remains
invisible. Only specially gifted people, particularly witch doctors, can
see _arumburinga;_ they can even speak with them. Among other Australian
tribes which believe in rebirth, no belief in spirits like the
_arumburinga_ has been traced (compare B. Ankermann, "Totenkult und
Seelenglauben bei Afrikanischen Völkern," _Zeitschrift für Ethnologie,_
Jahrgang 50, pp. 89 _et seq._).

There is, however, general agreement in the belief that the ancestral
parents brought into the world the spirit children, who are continually
reborn. Among many tribes, as the Dieri and the Warramunga, it is
believed that the sex changes at every rebirth, so that the ancestral
spirit once takes the form of a male and the next time that of a female.
The conditions are such among the Australians that their ignorance of
the connection between sexual intercourse and propagation is not at all
surprising. Spencer points out that among the Australians there are no
"virgins," for as soon as a girl is sexually ripe she is given to a
particular man, with whom she has sexual intercourse right through life.
In this respect there is no difference among the native women; yet the
people see that some women have children and others none, and also that
the women with children have them at unequal intervals that have no
connection with sexual intercourse. Besides, the women know that they
are pregnant only when they feel the quickening, and that is often at a
time when they have had nothing to do with a man. Therefore they attempt
to explain the origin of children in some other manner, which is in
accordance with the very primitive mode of thought of these
unprogressive people. In this connection it may be mentioned that the
Australian mothers attribute the birth of half-castes to their having
eaten too much of the white man's flour. Therefore old Australians
accept without question as their own the half-caste children of their
wives, and treat them as such. Though the natives of Northern Queensland
know that the animals propagate sexually, they dispute this as regards
human beings, because man, in contradistinction to the animals, has a
living spirit, a soul, which could not be begotten by a material
process. A. Lang thinks that with regard to the genesis of mankind the
psychology of these primitive people has obscured their knowledge of
physiology. According to him, the idea that there is no connection
between cohabitation and generation cannot be considered as primary in
man.

A proof of this ignorance of the fertilisation process among the
Australians is the splitting of the penis practised by them. Otherwise
these tribes, which have a scarcity of women and children, and which
desire progeny, would not perform an operation by which the semen fails
to fulfil its function in the majority of cases of cohabitation. It is
becoming more and more certain that this splitting of the penis serves
exclusively the purpose of lust, and is least of all intended as a
deliberate birth preventative (von Reitzenstein).

Evidences of the ignorance of generation are also to be found elsewhere
in cases where the above-mentioned objection of Lang does not apply. In
Melanesia the connection between cohabitation and conception seems to
have been unknown until lately. R. Thurnwald says that among the tribes
on the Bismarck and Solomon Islands visited by him this connection is
well known nowadays, but the causal relationship is not so clearly
conceived as by our psychologically trained physicians. As a natural
phenomenon conception sometimes occurs and sometimes not. Intentional
and real forgetting, inexact calculation of time, and the strangeness of
men towards women, who are held as inferiors, all make it appear
logically probable that conception can take place without cohabitation.
To this must be added the weirdness of the whole process, which is
therefore given a mysterious interpretation, and also that mode of
thought which connects the young product with the place where it is
found, with the fruits of a plant, and with the young ones of a bird,
etc. Codrington reports the same conditions among the Banks Islanders.

Many tribes of Central Borneo, being mentally and economically far above
the Australian natives, assume that pregnancy only lasts four or five
months, namely, as long as it is recognised externally in the woman,
and that the child enters the body of the woman shortly before the sign
of pregnancy. These tribes of Borneo also do not know that the testicles
are necessary for propagation (Nieuwenhuis, p. 144).

In Africa it has been established, at least of the Baganda, that they
believe in the possibility of conception without cohabitation.
Conceptional totemism, the assumption of impregnation by the animals
venerated as totems, which exists among the Bakalai in the Congo region,
points to a similar belief. Conceptional totemism also exists among the
Indian tribes of North-western America (Frazer, Vol. II., pp. 506, 507,
and 611, 612).

Among the ancient Mexicans there existed, according to von Reitzenstein,
the belief that the children come from a supernal habitation, the flower
land, to enter into the mother. Various objects were thought to carry
the foetal germs, especially shuttlecocks and green jewels. For this
reason these were placed on the mat for the Mexican bridal pair after
the marriage ceremony. The rattle club is perhaps also considered as the
bearer of fertility. In India various trees play a _rôle_ in
fertilisation ideas.

Noteworthy is the belief found in various places that only the
nourishment of the child is supplied by the mother before birth, while
the germ of the new being comes from the father. This is the opinion of
certain tribes of South-east Australia described by Howitt and the same
belief exists among South American tribes who have the well-known
_couvade_. Karl von den Steinen writes regarding this: "One might be
tempted to explain this curious custom, which is very advantageous to
the women, by the hunting life. But even if the custom suits the women,
it is not evident why the men should have submitted to it. The father
cuts off the navel cord of the new-born child, goes to bed, looks after
the child, and fasts strictly until the rest of the navel cord falls off
(or even longer). One might consider him as the professional doctor who
also fasts like the student medicine-man, as otherwise his cure would be
endangered and the child harmed. But not only the Xingu, but many other
tribes, say that the father must not eat fish, meat, or fruit, as it
would be the same as if the child itself ate them; and there is no
reason to doubt that this is the real belief of the natives. The
medicine-man of the village is always at disposal, and he is called in
in all cases when the mother or child falls ill. The father is the
patient in so far as he feels himself one with the child. Nor is it
difficult to understand how this comes about. The native cannot very
well know anything about the egg cell and the Graafian follicle, and he
cannot know that the mother harbours elements corresponding to the
bird's egg. For the native the man is the bearer of the egg, which, to
put it clearly and concisely, he lays into the mother, and which she
hatches during pregnancy." This idea of the _couvade_ is confirmed by
linguistic peculiarities: there are the same or similar words for
"father," "testicle," "egg," and "child." The child is considered part
of the father, and therefore, as long as the child is at its weakest,
the father must keep diet, and must avoid anything that the other could
not digest. The child is considered the reproduction of the father, and
"for the sake of the helpless, unintelligent creature, representing a
miniature copy of himself, he must behave as if he were a child to whom
no harm must come. Should the child happen to die in the first days, how
could the father, with such views as he has, doubt that he is to blame,
seeing that he has eaten indigestible things, particularly as all
illnesses are due to the fault of others? What we call _pars pro toto_
prevails in all folk belief in connection with witch or healing magic,"
though it cannot be assumed "that the magic worker has a clear
conception of the 'part' with which he works. The _couvade_ proceeds
according to the same logic, only that in this case the whole stands for
the 'part.' It comes to the same whether the enemy's hair is poisoned,
and he is thus brought into a decline, or whether food is eaten which is
harmful to the child detached from one's own body, because it could not
digest it, at least not during the time when the detachment takes
place."

Besides South America and Australia, the _couvade_ is also frequent in
Asia and Africa. Previously it existed also in South-western Europe.
Hugo Kunike, who gives a survey of the prevalence and literature of the
_couvade_, thinks that this custom arose from prohibitions which the man
was subject to in matriarchal families. The prohibitions condemned the
man to inactivity for some time after the birth, so that he took to his
hammock. There resulted an external condition which led to an analogy
with the lying-in period. There can, according to Kunike, be no question
of an imitation of the woman's lying-in, for with the South American
Indians and other primitive peoples among whom the _couvade_ is found no
lying-in of the women occurs.




VII

MUTILATION OF SEX ORGANS


Mutilations of the sex organs are performed by many primitive peoples
for religious reasons. They occur much more rarely for the purpose of
sex stimulation, as, _e.g._, the artificial lengthening of the small
labia among the Hottentots and the negro women and the slitting of the
penis among the Australians. The most frequent mutilation is the
abscission of the foreskin of the penis. Circumcision of boys is
widespread in Asia, Africa, and Australia. Among the Mohammedan tribes
of Asia and the negroes of Northern and Middle Africa it is mostly
performed with a razor. In Indonesia a sharp bamboo splinter serves as
the instrument for operation; in other places sharp stone splinters are
used. In addition to the familiar circular abscission of the foreskin,
numerous primitive peoples practise incision of the foreskin, which is
split downwards in its full length. Bleeding is stopped generally by
very simple means, either by some kind of tampon or by styptic powders.
In girls, as, for instance, on some of the Indonesian Islands, the
operation often merely consists in the abscission of a small piece of
the preputium clitoridis. Among the East African tribes, however, parts
of the mons veneris and of the large labia are removed, generally with
a dirty razor. After the removal of the labia the two wounds are made to
coalesce by letting the girl lie in a suitable position, or sometimes by
a suture, which serves the purpose of closing up the vagina. A little
tube is inserted to allow for micturition. The united parts are again
partly severed for marriage, and completely in case of confinement.
After the recovery from confinement partial occlusion is again resorted
to (Bartels, p. 271).

Among the natives of Southern Asia living under the influence of Islam
circumcision of boys is practised universally, but it is also customary
among many peoples that are quite free from Islamitic influence.

Circumcision of girls is practised by various Islamitic peoples of
Western Asia and India. The operation is performed by old women. In
Baroda and Bombay the clitoris is cut away, ostensibly in order to
lessen the sensuality of the girls. In the province of Sindo the
circumcision of girls is fairly prevalent, especially among the Pathan
and Baluchi tribes. It is performed shortly before marriage by the
barber's wife or a female servant, who uses a razor, and it is said to
make the confinement easier. Among many tribes in the North-western
border province the girls are also circumcised at the age of marriage,
and here, besides the clitoris, the small labia are also sometimes cut
away. In Baluchistan among some peoples the tip of the clitoris is
pinched off; while among others the labia are slashed, so that scars
are formed. The operation is performed partly in childhood, partly on
the bridal night; in the latter case it assures the requisite flow of
blood at the first coition. Among some tribes, in place of circumcision
or in addition to it, the hymen is torn on the bridal night (should it
still exist), and the vaginal entrance is wounded, so that bleeding is
sure to take place at cohabitation. In Sind the castes which prostitute
their women are said to practise partial infibulation for contracting
the vagina. It is reported from the Punjab that formerly men leaving
their home for a time used to close up the sex passage of the wives they
left behind.

On the Philippine Islands circumcision is frequently practised by the
non-Christian natives, but not everywhere. The Igorots of Luzon incise
the foreskin of boys from four to seven years old at the upper side of
the glans with a bamboo knife or the edge of a battle axe. They say this
is necessary in order to prevent the skin from growing longer and
longer. No other reason is now known to them for this operation.
Circumcision is practised by the Mohammedans of the Southern Philippine
Islands.

Incision of the foreskin is customary on the Indonesian Islands, thus,
_e.g._, on Buru, Ceram, the Watu-Bela Islands, in the Minahassa, partly
also in the remaining North and Central Celebes, also on Ambon and
Halmaheira. Circumcision is customary on the Aru and Kei Islands, on the
Ceram Laut and Goram group, in certain parts of Central Celebes, Ambon,
etc. It is doubtful whether circumcision here is due to the influence of
Islam.

Incision is practised on various islands in the Western Pacific Ocean,
according to Friederici (p. 45), for instance, on New Guinea, on the
south-east coast, among the Jabim and on the Astrolabe Bay. In wide
districts of New Guinea, however, the inhabitants are not circumcised.
On the island Umboi, between New Guinea and New Pomerania, incision is
customary, also in various places on the north coast of New Pomerania,
on the Witu Islands, some islands of the Admiralty group, etc. If
incision is performed at a very early age, the result is similar to that
of circumcision. Frequently, however, only completely mature young men
are circumcised; in such cases the cut foreskin hangs down as an ugly
brown flap. It is questionable whether this intensifies the women's
excitement. As many people as possible are circumcised, in order to have
the opportunity for a great festival. This is the result of the liking
for numbers shown by primitive people, which is to be met with
everywhere. For the operation, the person is laid on his back and held
down by relatives. The boys scream and wince at the moment of cutting;
but the adults are ashamed before the women, and take an areca nut, into
which they bite. Among the East Barriari on the north coast of New
Pomerania, the operator--a wise man, but not the priest--pushes an
oblong piece of wood under the preputium of the patient, and cuts it
from the top downward with an obsidian splinter. The custom of incision
is widespread in the New Hebrides, New Caledonia (with the exception of
the Loyalty Islands), and also in Fiji.

While with the Empress Augusta River expedition in New Guinea, A.
Roesike found the foreskin cut among a number of men. It was not a
circumcision, nor an incision of the foreskin, but a deep cut into the
glans about 1 to 1½ centimetres long, sometimes a single one, sometimes
a double one crosswise.

Among some tribes of Indonesia a mutilation is customary, which is most
likely intended to intensify the lust of the women. It consists in a
perforation of the glans or the body of the male organ, into which a
little stick is inserted. These little sticks are called _palang_,
_ampallang_, _utang_ or _kampion_, and are replaced on journeys or at
work by feather quills. Among some tribes several little sticks are
stuck through the penis. Nieuwenhuis describes this operation as
follows: "At first the glans is made bloodless by pressing it between
the two arms of a bent strip of bamboo. At each of these arms there are
openings at the required position opposite each other, through which a
sharp pointed copper pin is pressed after the glans has become less
sensitive. Formerly a pointed bamboo chip was used for this purpose. The
bamboo clamp is removed, and the pin, fastened by a cord, is kept in the
opening until the canal has healed up. Later on the copper pin
(_utang_) is replaced by another one, generally of tin, which is worn
constantly. Only during hard work or at exhausting enterprises is the
metal pin replaced by a wooden one." Exceptionally brave men have the
privilege, together with the chief, of boring a second canal, crossing
the first, into the glans. Distinguished men may, in addition, wear a
ring round the penis, which is cut from the scales of the _pangolin_,
and studded with blunt points. It may hence be concluded that the
perforation of the penis is not intended as an endurance test for the
young men, but that the pin is introduced for the heightening of sexual
excitement. Many natives assert that the insertion of a pin in the
perforated penis has the purpose of preventing pederasty, which is very
frequent among the Malays (compare Nieuwenhuis, Vol. I., p. 78; Kleiweg
de Zwaan, p. 301; Meyer, p. 878; Hose and McDougall, Vol. II., p. 170;
Buschan, 1912, p. 240).

Among the Australians the slitting of the male urethra is frequently
practised. Formerly it was believed that this custom was intended to
prevent conception. But as the Australians who are not under European
influence are ignorant of the process of generation, this cannot be its
meaning. The operation is generally performed in boyhood or early youth,
but even adult men undergo it. Where this operation on the urethra is
customary, the hymen of the girls is cut, the cut often going through
the perineum. Many tribes practise simple circumcision. Among the
Australian tribe Worgait, for instance, certain relatives decide about
the circumcision of the boys. After a previous elaborate ceremonial the
boy who is to be circumcised is laid on the backs of three men lying on
the ground; another man sits on his chest, one holds his legs apart, and
the sixth performs the operation by drawing the foreskin forward and
cutting it off with a sharp splinter of stone. The group is hidden from
the view of the women by a screen made of pieces of bark. Afterwards the
youth is instructed by old men how he must behave as a man, and he is
informed about the matters kept secret from women. He remains for
another two months under the supervision of two sons of his maternal
uncle, and has further to go through a number of ceremonies. Other
tribes of the Australian North Territory have similar customs.

Circumcision among the Hamites of East Africa is particularly elaborate.
As an example we may take the pastoral tribe of the Nandi. These people
used to circumcise boys every seven and a half years, and celebrated the
occasion with great festivals. Since 1905 circumcision takes place at
shorter intervals. The usual age for circumcision is from the fifteenth
to the nineteenth year. Younger boys are only circumcised if they are
rich orphans, or if their fathers are old men. The ceremony begins at
the time of the first quarter of the moon. Three days before the
operation the boys are given over by their fathers or guardians into
the charge of old men, called _moterenic_, as many as ten boys going to
two of these men. The _moterenic_ and their boys betake themselves to a
neighbouring wood, where they build a hut, in which they spend the six
months after the circumcision. The boys have their heads shaved and are
given a strong aperient of Arsidia sp. Warriors visit the hut, and take
away all the boys' clothes and ornaments. Then young girls visit the
boys and give them a part of their clothing and ornaments. After the
boys have put these on they inform their relations of the forthcoming
circumcision. There is dancing on the next day, after which the warriors
draw the boys aside to discover from their expressions whether they will
behave cowardly or bravely at the circumcision. After this examination
the boys receive necklaces from their girl friends, with which they
decorate themselves. After sunset they must listen to the sharpening of
the operating knife. Warriors are present, and tease the boys. Later on
all undress, and a procession is formed with a _moterenic_ at the head
and rear of it. Four times they have to crawl through a small cage,
where warriors are stationed at the entrance and exit with nettles and
hornets. With the former they beat the boys in the face and on the sex
organs; the hornets they set on their backs. A fire is kept burning in
the middle of the room, around which old men are seated. Each boy has to
step before them and beg for permission to be circumcised. He is
questioned about his early life; and if the old men think that he has
told an untruth or is hiding something, he is put among nettles. If the
old men are satisfied with his words, the price of the circumcision has
to be arranged, whereupon the boys are led back to their huts. There the
warriors and elders assemble the next morning, and at dawn the
circumcision begins. The boy to be circumcised is supported by the
senior _moterenic_, the others sitting close by and looking on. The
operator kneels before the boy, and with a quick cut performs the first
part of the operation; the foreskin is drawn forward and cut off at the
tip of the glans penis. The surrounding men watch the boy's face in
order to see whether he winces or shows any sign of pain. If this is the
case, he is called a coward, and receives the dishonourable nickname of
_kilpit_; he is not allowed to be present at later circumcisions nor at
the children's dances. The brave boys receive bundles of ficus from the
women, who welcome them with cries of joy when they return the necklaces
which they have previously received from their girl friends. The
foreskins are collected and placed in an ox horn. Friends and relatives
make merry together, while the second part of the operation begins. At
this only sterile girls may be present, and also women who have lost
several brothers and sisters at short intervals. Many boys become
unconscious during this part of the operation. The wounds are only
washed with cold water, and the boys are led back to their huts, where
they spend some weeks quietly. During the first four days they are not
allowed to touch food with their hands; they must eat either out of a
half-calabash or with the help of some leaves. They get what they like,
also milk and meat. But, apart from their _moterenic_, nobody may come
near them for four days. Afterwards the hand-washing ceremony is
performed; the foreskins are taken out of the ox horn, sacrificed to
their god, and then buried in cowdung at the foot of a croton tree. Now
the boys may eat with their hands again, but still no one may see them
except the young children who bring them food. Three months later, when
the boys are quite well again, they have to go through a new ceremony,
during which they have to dive repeatedly into the river. If one of them
should meet with an accident, his father has to kill a goat. Only now
may the boys move about freely, but they still have to wear women's
clothes (as hitherto) and a special head-dress that hides their faces.
They must not enter a cattle kraal nor come near the cattle, nor are
they allowed to be outdoors when the hyena howls. This period of
semi-seclusion lasts about eight weeks. Its conclusion is celebrated by
a feast. Still more ceremonies follow, and again a feast, after which
the boys finally enter the status of manhood.

Girls are circumcised when some of them in the settlement have reached
marriage age. They are shaved, given aperients, have to put on men's
clothes, which they receive from their lovers, and take their clubs,
loin bells, etc. After three days' ceremonial the circumcision is
performed in the morning, at which the mothers and some old women are
present; men are only admitted when they have lost several brothers and
sisters in succession. The mothers run about crying and shouting during
the operation. Only the clitoris is cut out. If a girl behaves bravely,
she may return the clothes and other things of her lover, otherwise they
are thrown away. The girls, too, must not touch food with their hands
for four days; afterwards they are put into long dresses with a kind of
head mask, and have to go through a period of seclusion. After the
completion of various other formalities they are fit for marriage
(Hollis, 1909, pp. 52 _et seq._).

No satisfactory explanation has so far been forthcoming of the purpose
of these elaborate circumcision customs. Similar customs are observed by
other Hamites of Eastern Africa.

Among the Masai there exists the belief that circumcision was introduced
by the command of God (Merker, p. 60). After the circumcision boys and
girls are considered grown up. The former have to be circumcised as soon
as they are strong enough to take part in a war expedition. The
circumcision of sons whose parents have no property and of poor orphans
takes place last of all. For the meat banquet which the newly
circumcised hold every one present has to supply an ox. Poor boys must
first acquire it by working for it. The circumcision is a public affair,
and is arranged by the witch doctor in certain years. The old men
consult in all the districts, and fix a day for the circumcision of the
first batch of boys. All the boys circumcised during a certain number of
years form an age class with a particular name (as among the Nandi).
Several weeks before the circumcision the boys, adorned with many
ornaments, dance and sing in their own and neighbouring kraals, in order
to express their joy at their approaching admission into the warrior
class. On the day before the circumcision the boys' heads are shaved. On
the appointed day itself the boys and the warriors who are present at
the operation assemble before dawn at the place chosen by the operators.
The boys pour cold water over each other, so as to become less
sensitive. After the operation the wounded member is washed with milk;
no remedy for stopping the bleeding is applied. Later on all the men of
the neighbourhood assemble in the kraal, where they are regaled with
meat and honey beer by the parents of the newly circumcised boys. The
girls are circumcised as soon as signs of puberty become evident,
sometimes even earlier. The operation consists in a complete abscission
of the clitoris. The wound, as with the boys, is washed in milk. The
girl remains in her mother's hut until the wound is healed. As soon as
the man to whom the girl is promised as bride hears of her recovery he
pays her father the remaining part of the bride-price, and nothing more
stands in the way of the marriage.

Among the Somals in North-east Africa the boys are circumcised when six
years old, and the girls are infibulated at three or four years of age.
The infibulation is preceded by the shortening of the clitoris and the
clipping of the external labia. The operation is performed by
experienced women, who also sew up the inner labia (except for a small
aperture) with horse-hair, bast, or cotton thread. The girls have to
rest for several days with their legs tied together. Before marriage the
above-mentioned women or the girls themselves undo the stitching, which,
however, is in most cases only severed completely before the confinement
(Paulitschke, p. 24).

In Western Africa most peoples practise the circumcision of boys. The
age at which this takes place varies greatly. The Duala in Cameron have
the boys circumcised when four or five years old, the Bakwiri as late as
the twelfth to fourteenth year, and the Dahomey even postpone the
circumcision to the twentieth year. But it always takes place before
marriage, as women would refuse to have relationship with uncircumcised
men (Buschan, "Sitten," III., p. 40).

A peculiar disfigurement of the sex organs is customary among the
Hottentots, Bushmen, and many Bantu tribes of Middle and South Africa.
This consists in the artificial elongation of the small labia. It was
first observed among the Hottentot women, and therefore the elongated
labia were called the "Hottentot apron." Among the Jao, Makonde, and
other East African Bantu tribes, the girls at the ages of seven, eight,
or nine years are instructed by old women about sex intercourse and
their behaviour towards grown-up people. At the same time they are
encouraged to systematically alter the natural shape of the genital
organs by continually pulling at the labia minora and thus unnaturally
lengthening them. Karl Weule has seen such disfigured organs from 7 to 8
centimetres long. According to the assertion of numerous male natives,
the elongated labia assume such dimensions that they hang half-way down
to the knee. The main purpose of this disfiguration seems to be erotic;
it is said to excite the men. The assumption that the labia minora are
naturally exceptionally large among the Hottentots is certainly wrong.
Karl Weule is right when he definitely maintains that his proof of the
artificial elongation of the labia among the East Africans establishes
it as an indubitable fact that the famous Hottentot apron is also an
artificial product. Le Vaillant established this independently almost
100 years before Weule; but the error dragged on from decade to decade,
chiefly because nobody troubled or had the good fortune to study the
puberty rites as Weule did. It is time at last to give up this erroneous
idea.

Among the Jaos the operation of the boys consists in a combination of
incision with circumcision so that only a tiny piece of the under-part
of the preputium remains. The boy must show courage at the operation.
Screams, if they occur, are drowned by the laughter of the bystanders.
Bleeding is stilled by bark powder. The boys have to lie down for about
twenty days or more, until healing has taken place. As usual,
circumcision is combined with instruction about sex behaviour.

In former times the Jaos are said to have imposed castration as a
punishment on men for misbehaviour with the chief's wife (Weule, pp. 29,
35). Castration still takes place for this reason among other negro
races, especially the Mohammedan Sudanese.

In North America the few Indians still living in a state of nature do
not practise mutilation of the sex organs. In South America circumcision
exists among the linguistically isolated tribes and the neighbouring
Aruake and Karaib tribes of the north-west, also among the tribes on the
Ucayali and the tributaries of the Apure (W. Schmidt, p. 1048). The
Kayapo Indians on the Araguay river cut the frenulum of the penis with a
taquara splinter, and the penis cuff is fastened on to the rolled-up
foreskin (W. Kissenberth, p. 55).

The purpose of circumcision is probably to prolong the sex act, for the
bare glans is less sensitive than the covered one. Friederici says (p.
89) that the black boys congregating on the stations and plantations
frequently discuss these matters amongst themselves; they know that the
glans of the circumcised is much less sensitive than that of the
uncircumcised. Many authors are of the opinion that the abscission or
incision of the foreskin in boys has the purpose of making cohabitation
easier in later years, as this is often made difficult by phimosis
(tightness of the foreskin). Külz (p. 40) found that among the youthful
plantation workers in New Mecklenburg nearly a quarter were afflicted
with phimosis, and often to such a degree that normal sex functioning
was quite impossible. But such a condition does not seem to prevail
among most of the primitive peoples practising circumcision. And,
further, of what use would mutilations be that had nothing to do with
tightness of the foreskin?

The prolonged festivals and elaborate ceremonials which are so often
connected with the circumcision of boys and of girls, or with their
admission to the state of manhood and womanhood (without accompanying
circumcision), are intended to preserve the event in the memory. The
long ceremony is deeply impressed upon the mind, and forms a firm
nucleus round which other memories cluster which otherwise would be lost
in the humdrum of ordinary life. How could the time of entry into
manhood remain without ceremonious festival? This seems all the more
necessary because the growth into manhood is gradual and almost
unnoticeable, and if there were no ceremony, it would pass without
making any impression. It is therefore the intention not only to give
expression to the beginning virility, but above all to the admission
into the league of youth (Schurtz, pp. 95, 96).




VIII

MATURITY AND DECLINE


Among all human races the signs of maturity appear later and less
distinctly in the male than in the female. In Europeans the period of
puberty coincides with the second period of increased bodily growth,
which ceases in the male between the sixteenth and the eighteenth year,
and in the female between the fourteenth and the sixteenth year. The end
of the puberty period may, however, in individual cases, be postponed
for some years. The exact time of the advent of sex maturity, which, on
account of their menstruation, can be fixed much more readily in girls
than in boys, varies not only individually, but racially. The same
applies to the difference in time between the advent of maturity and the
cessation of bodily growth. Sexual maturity, as well as the cessation of
bodily growth, takes place much earlier in Europeans than in some of the
primitive peoples. Among other primitive peoples, however, maturity
occurs comparatively late, and bodily growth ceases shortly after. To
the latter belong certainly some of the peoples living in the tropics.

The opinion still prevails that climate has a considerable influence on
the advent of maturity. Rudolf Martin (1915) remarks: "Races living in
the tropics grow more quickly and mature earlier than the races living
in temperate zones. This is undoubtedly due to the earlier advent of
puberty."

As regards the Japanese, E. Baelz had already in 1891 disputed the
statement that they mature early. He found, however, that the growth of
both sexes ceases in Japan earlier than in Europe; still sex maturity in
the female does not occur earlier. According to the concordant
statements of female teachers of various girls' schools, the Japanese
girls, in fact, reach maturity later than European girls, and half-caste
girls take a medium position.

Since then reliable data about the advent of maturity among non-European
races have seldom been given, but those to hand show that most probably
even among coloured primitive people puberty generally occurs late.

Very important material has been collected by O. Reche in Matupi (New
Pomerania, Melanesia), with the assistance of the Catholic mission of
the place. He found that the rhythm of growth of the Melanesians
corresponds on the whole to that of the Europeans, except that the
growth ceases altogether a few years earlier. Development in height is
finished on the whole in girls at the beginning of the seventeenth year,
and in boys in the eighteenth year. But, as regards the advent of
puberty, Reche's researches led to the surprising result that all Matupi
girls, with the exception of those seventeen years old, had not yet
menstruated. Reche remarks that this strikingly late appearance of
menstruation is also known to the missionaries, because in order to
prevent early marriages they only consent to the marriage of a girl
after the first menstruation has taken place. Reche's experience is in
strong contradiction to the belief formerly taken for granted, for
puberty occurs among these inhabitants of the tropics not only not
earlier, but, on the contrary, later than with the Europeans living in
temperate climates. Of importance is the fact that in the Matupi natives
puberty coincides with the highest point of the curve of growth, namely,
with the end of the development in height. Puberty commences when growth
ceases. It almost seems as if the advent of maturity absorbs all the
strength and hinders further growth. It is quite different with
Europeans in this respect: the beginning of puberty falls with them in
the second period of growth (in boys the twelfth to the sixteenth, in
girls the eleventh to the fourteenth year), and therefore long before
growth ceases altogether.

It would seem that the conditions existing among Europeans are the
primitive state, as with the majority of animals also puberty begins
before the cessation of growth.

Reche reports further that, corresponding to the late puberty, the
secondary sexual characteristics also appear exceptionally late in
Matupi children. This is the chief reason why the boys and girls,
especially as they are small, appear remarkably young even shortly
before maturity, and why their age seems much less than it actually is.
The first beginning of the change from the areola mamma to the budding
breast shows itself among the Matupi girls not before the sixteenth
year; the development of the breast seems to coincide with the first
menstruation. Axillary hair did not appear in sixteen-year-old Matupi
girls, with one exception; and it was scanty in those seventeen years
old, though it is generally copious in adults. There was also no trace
of a beard in seventeen-year-old boys, though it is well developed in
the older men. It must be added that the late differentiation of
secondary sexual characteristics is also noticeable among other coloured
races, as, _e.g._, among the Philippines and other Indonesian races.

Among the Papuans of New Guinea also sex maturity occurs late. As
Richard Neuhaus wrote, according to information given by missionaries
who have lived for a long time among the natives on Tami and among the
Jabim, the first menstruation generally appears in the fifteenth to
sixteenth year. Young males look very undeveloped up to the sixteenth
year. Neuhaus thought this late maturity was the result of bad feeding,
though it does not appear from his other descriptions that the economic
conditions of the Papuans are especially unfavourable.

A. E. Jenks reports of the Igorots on Luzon that boys as well as girls
attain puberty at a late age, generally between fourteen and sixteen
years. The civilised Ilkano people settled among the Igorots definitely
declare that the girls do not menstruate before they have reached the
sixteenth or seventeenth year. A considerable error as regards their age
seems to be excluded with these people, who have lived a long time under
European influence.

Of the Andamanese, a pigmy race, Portman and Molesworth write that
puberty appears in boys and girls round about the fifteenth year. Bodily
growth is finished at eighteen years, and is in any case after maturity
very trivial.

Eugen Fischer makes the following statements about the Bastards in
German South-west Africa: "In one family five out of six daughters
menstruated for the first time at the age of fifteen, one at the age of
sixteen. One Bastard woman had first menstruated at the age of
seventeen, three of her daughters at thirteen, the fourth, who was
anæmic, at seventeen. Another Bastard woman, who herself had her first
menstruation at fifteen, had two daughters from a white man who had
reached puberty at sixteen and seventeen years of age. A girl with
distinct anæmia stated that she had had her first period at sixteen
years, her sister even as late as eighteen," Fischer knows of three
girls that became mature at sixteen, fourteen, and thirteen years. L.
Schultze reports that with the Hottentots the first menstruation
appears, as a rule, between the ages of thirteen and fifteen.

There is, unfortunately, no information to be had about the negroes
with regard to this subject. The puberty rites practised by them give no
clue to the real age at the advent of puberty.

Ales Hrdlicka (pp. 125-129) tried to determine the age of puberty among
Indian girls of the south-west of the United States by their height, as
definite statements of age are not to be had. This method is not without
objection, for it is certain that individuals who have attained puberty
are decidedly taller than persons of the same age who have not reached
maturity. Hrdlicka found that of those examined in the twelfth or
thirteenth year one-third of the Apache girls and as many as
three-quarters of the Pima girls had already menstruated. In the age
class of thirteen to fourteen years four-fifths of the Apache and
nine-tenths of the Pima girls had already menstruated, while of
forty-six older girls only one had not yet attained puberty. The first
signs of breast development were noticed by Hrdlicka in clothed Indian
maidens whose ages he estimated to be from eleven to twelve years. But
it was only between fifteen and seventeen that the girls acquired the
typical womanly form; until then they have, as Hrdlicka says, "a
somewhat male appearance." In youths the beard begins to grow at the
fifteenth or sixteenth year. The climate is moderate in the country of
the Apache and Pima Indians; the days are decidedly hot in the low-lying
regions, but the nights are generally cold in these regions, even in
summer.

In comparison it may be noted that, according to H. P. Bowditch's
investigations in Boston, nearly four-fifths of the white girls born in
America mature between the thirteenth and seventeenth year. Puberty is
reached relatively most often between the ages of fourteen and fifteen,
though over 40 per cent. of 575 girls examined had not yet menstruated
at the completed fifteenth year.

Within one and the same race the conditions of life seem to have a great
influence on the age of puberty and bodily development. Unfavourable
conditions produce a retardation of puberty; favourable conditions
accelerate it. This may be the chief cause why the beginning of puberty
varies individually by several years.

There exists so far no definite explanation of the racial differences in
the age of puberty. Reche says, "It is conceivable that the
characteristically late maturity of a tropical race (like that of the
Melanesians) may gradually have been acquired by the unfavourable
influence of too hot a climate or of continual underfeeding acting on
many generations."

It is remarkable that, in contradistinction to the Melanesians, the
Indians become mature very early, and the same applies most likely to
the Australians. In India, as in Australia, sexual intercourse is begun
at a very youthful age, among the girls often long before the first
menstruation. It is possible that on account of this the age of puberty
is lowered, so that girls who mature late are more easily injured and
perish in greater number than the girls maturing earlier, who are less
injured by the premature sexual intercourse. The male sex may have been
influenced in the same direction through heredity.

Just as physical maturity, so is the cessation of generative power and
bodily decline more marked in women than in men. In Middle and Northern
Europe, procreation generally ceases with women of an age between
forty-five and fifty years. Numerous birth statistics from all countries
of this continent show that birth in women over fifty years old is very
rare. It is not quite clear how the case stands in this respect among
the coloured races. Hrdlicka reports of the North American Indian women
that with them the climacterium occurs apparently at about the same age
as with European women. It must be taken into consideration that
accurate statements of age are wanting, and that the age of Indian women
can easily be greatly overrated. Otherwise it has generally been
reported of coloured women that they age rapidly, and that their
reproductive period is comparatively short. In North-west Brazil the
Indian girls marry as soon as in their tenth to twelfth year, on account
of their rapid development. Early maturity and marriage may be one of
the chief causes of their rapid decline. The Indian women are generally
beyond their prime at the age of twenty. Their straight figure is
frequently covered with a disgusting accumulation of fat, and the
elasticity of movement gives way to indolence. Other women become very
thin after several confinements, their features become sharp and bony,
and among old women one often comes across real hag-like creatures with
half-blind, running eyes (Koch-Grünberg, II., p. 149).

In India the women of the Dravidian as well as of the Mongolian races
age rapidly. Their generative power rarely lasts longer than the
beginning of the forties. Among the pigmies the time of procreation is
said to be equally short (Portman and Molesworth). Spencer and Gillen
say that with the Australian women a rapid bodily decline takes place as
early as the twenty-fifth and at the latest in the thirtieth year, which
cannot be attributed to exceptional privations or harsh treatment. The
Australian women apparently reach the age of fifty years or more only
exceptionally.

Jochelson (pp. 413 _et seq._) writes that the Koryak women age very
rapidly. They cease to bear children at about the age of forty. Other
travellers have made statements about the great age that the Koryaks are
said to attain. Jochelson's thorough-going investigations showed that of
284 persons only thirteen could possibly have been over sixty-five years
old, and among them there was only one really old man.

Schultze (p. 297) mentions two Hottentot women who had given birth at
the age of forty-seven, and another who still had her period at
fifty-five. Among the negresses late births also occur. Unfortunately,
ethnographical literature only rarely gives facts with regard to this
subject.




IX

BIBLIOGRAPHY


AMUNDSEN, R. Die Nordwestpassage. München, 1908.

BAELZ, E. Die körperlichen Eigenschaften der Japaner. Bd. 2.

BAELZ, E. Das Wachstum der Geschlechter. Verhandl. d. Berliner Ges. f.
Anthropologie, 1901, S. 211.

BAGGE, S. The Circumcision Ceremony among the Naivasha Masai. Journal
Anthropol. Inst., Vol. 34, pp. 167-169.

BARTELS, M. Die Medizin der Naturvölker. Leipzig, 1893.

BLUMENTRITT, FERD. Versuch einer Ethnographie der Philippinen. Gotha,
1882.

BOGORAS, W. The Chukchee. Leiden and New York, 1904-1909 (Memoirs of the
American Museum of Natural History).

BOWDITCH, H. P. The Growth of Children. Eighth Annual Report of the
State Board of Health, State of Massachusetts. Boston, 1877.

BRINCKER, H. P. Charakter, Sitten und Gebräuche speziell der Bantu
Deutsch-Südwestafrikas. Mitt. d. Sem. f. Orient. Sprachen, III.3.

BUSCHAN, GEORG. Das Sexuelle in der Völkerkunde. Handbuch der
Sexualwissenschaften. Leipzig, 1912.

BUSCHAN, GEORG. Die Sitten der Völker. Stuttgart, 1914-1915.

CODRINGTON, R. H. The Melanesians. Oxford, 1891.

CRAWLEY, A. E. Exogamy and the Mating of Cousins. Anthropological
Essays presented to E. B. Tylor. Oxford, 1907.

CUNOW, H. Zur Urgeschichte der Ehe und Familie. Stuttgart, 1912.

DEEGENER, P. Die Formen der Vergesellschaftung im Tierreich. Leipzig,
1918.

ELLIS, H. The Evolution of Modesty, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, 1913.

ENDLE, S. The Kacháris. London, 1911.

EYLMANN, E. Die Eingeborenen der Kolonie Südaustralien. Berlin, 1908.

FISCHER, EUGEN. Die Rehobother Bastards. Jena, 1913.

FRAZER, J. G. Totemism and Exogamy. London, 1913.

FRIEDERICI, GEORG. Beiträge zur Völker- und Sprachenkunde von
Deutsch-Neuguinea. Berlin, 1912. Mitt. a. d. Deutschen Schutzgeb.,
Ergänzungsheft 5.

FROBENIUS, LEO. Und Afrika sprach! Vol. 3: Unter den unsträflichen
Äthiopen. Charlottenburg, 1913.

GAIT, E. A. Census of India, Vol. 1, Part 1. Calcutta, 1913.

GERSON, ADOLF. Die Scham. Bonn, 1919.

HAHN, ED. Von der Hacke zum Pflug. Leipzig, 1914.

HELLWALD, F. Die menschliche Familie. Leipzig, 1888.

HINLOPEN u. SEVERIJN. Verslag van een onderzoek der Poggieilanden in
1852. Tijdschrift vor Ind. Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, II., p. 327.

HODSON, T. C. The Naga Tribes of Manipur. London, 1911.

HOLLIS, A. C. The Masai. Oxford, 1905.

HOLLIS, A. C. The Nandi. Oxford, 1909.

HOSE, C., and MCDOUGALL, W. The Pagan Tribes of Borneo. London, 1912.

HOWITT, A. C. The Native Tribes of South-east Australia. London, 1904.

HRDLICKA, ALES. Physiological and Medical Observations among the
Indians. Washington, 1908.

IYER, A. K. Cochin Tribes and Castes. Madras, 1909.

JAGORS NACHLASS. Bd. 1, Berlin, 1914.

JENKS, A. E. The Bontoc Igorot. Manila, 1905.

JOCHELSON, W. The Koryak. Leiden and New York, 1908 (Memoirs of the
American Museum of Natural History).

KISSENBERTH, W. Araguayareise. Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, 1912.

KLEIWEG DE ZWAAN, J. P. Heilkunde der Minangkabauer. In: Maass, Durch
Zentralsumatra, Vol. 2, Berlin, 1912.

KNOCHE, W. Beobachtungen über Geschlechtsleben und Niederkunft auf der
Osterinsel. Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, 1912.

KNOCHE, W. Einige Bemerkungen über die Uti-Krag. Ebenda, 1913.

KOCH-GRÜNBERG, THEODOR. Zwei Jahre unter den Indianern. Berlin, 1910.

KÜLZ, L. Biologie und Pathologie des Nachwuchses bei den Naturvölkern
der deutschen Schutzgebiete. Leipzig, 1919 (Beiheft zum Archiv für
Schiffs- u. Tropenhygiene).

KUNIKE, HUGO. Das sogenannte Männerkindbett. Zeitschrift für Ethnologie,
1911.

LANG, A. Australian Problems. Essays presented to E. B. Tylor. Oxford,
1907.

MARTIN, RUDOLF. Die Inlandstämme der malayischen Halbinsel. Jena, 1905.

MARTIN, RUDOLF. Lehrbuch der Anthropologie. Jena, 1914.

MCLENNAN, J. F. Studies in Ancient History. London, 1886.

MERKER, M. Die Masai. Berlin, 1905.

MEYER, A. B. Über die Perforation des Penis bei den Malayen. Mitt. der
Anthrop. Gesellschaft Wien, Bd. 7, 1878.

MORGAN, L. H. Die Urgesellschaft. Stuttgart, 1891.

MÜLLER, JOSEF. Das sexuelle Leben der Naturvölker. Leipzig, 1906.

MÜLLER, W. Die Wildenstämme der Insel Formosa. Zeitschrift für
Ethnologie, 1910.

NANSEN, F. Eskimoleben. Berlin, 1903.

NEUHAUSS, R. Deutsch-Neuguinea, Bd. 1. Berlin, 1911.

NIEUWENHUIS, A. W. Quer durch Borneo. Leiden, 1904.

PAULITSCHKE, PHILIPP. Beiträge zur Ethnographie und Anthropologie der
Somal usw. Leipzig, 1886.

PEAL, E. S. On the Morong. Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
Vol. 22.

PLAYFAIR, A. The Garos. London, 1909.

PLOSS, H., und BARTELS, M. Das Weib in der Natur- und Völkerkunde, 9.
Aufl. Leipzig, 1908.

PORTMAN and MOLESWORTH. Record of the Andamanese, 1893-1898. MS. in
British Museum.

RECHE, OTTO. Untersuchungen über das Wachstum und die Geschlechtsreife
bei melanesischen Kindern. Korrespondenzbl. d. D. Ges. f. Anthropol.,
41. Jahrg., Nr. 7.

REED, W. The Negrito of Zambales. Manila, 1904.

REITZENSTEIN, FERDINAND VON. Der Kausalzusammenhang zwischen
Geschlechtsverkehr und Empfängnis in Glaube und Branch der Natur- und
Kulturvölker. Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, 41. Jahrg., 1909, S. 644-683.

RIVERS, W. H. R. The Toda. London, 1906.

RIVERS, W. H. R. On the Origin of the Classificatory System of
Relationship. Essays presented to E. B. Tylor. Oxford, 1907.

ROESIKE, A. Ethnographische Ergebnisse der Kaiserin.
Augusta-Fluß-Expedition. Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, 1914.

ROSCOE, JOHN. The Baganda. London, 1911.

ROSCOE, JOHN. The Bahima. Journal of the Anthropological Institute, Vol.
37.

SARASIN, PAUL und FRITZ. Ergebnisse naturwissenschaftlicher
Forschungsreisen auf Ceylon, Bd. 3. Wiesbaden, 1892-1893.

SCHMIDT, WILHELM. Kulturkreise und Kulturschichten in Südamerika.
Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, 1913.

SCHULTZE, L. Aus Namaland und Kalahari. Jena, 1907.

SCHURTZ, HEINRICH. Altersklassen und Männerbünde. Berlin, 1902.

SCHWEINFURTH, GEORG. Im Herzen von Afrika. 3rd ed. Leipzig, 1908.

SELIGMANN, C. G. The Melanesians of British New Guinea. Cambridge, 1910.

SPENCER, BALDWIN. Native Tribes of the Northern Territory of Australia.
London, 1914.

SPENCER, BALDWIN, and GILLEN, F. The Native Tribes of Central Australia.
London, 1899.

SPENCER, BALDWIN, and GILLEN, F. The Northern Tribes of Central
Australia. London, 1904.

STEINEN, KARL V. D. Unter den Naturvölkern Zentralbrasiliens. Berlin,
1894.

THEAL, G. M. The Yellow and Dark-skinned People of Africa South of the
Zambesi. London, 1910.

THOMSON, BASIL H. The Fijians. London, 1908.

THURNWALD, R. Ethno-psychologische Studien. Leipzig, 1913.

WESTERMARCK, E. History of Human Marriage. London, 1891.

WEULE, KARL. Wissenschaftliche Ergebnisse meiner ethnogr.
Forschungsreise in den Südosten Deutsch-Ostafrikas. Berlin, 1908. Mitt.
a. d. D. Schutzgeb., Erg.-Heft 1.

WILKEN, G. A. Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van
Nederl.-Indië. Leiden, 1893.

WILLIAMSON, ROBERT W. The Mafulu. London, 1912.


THE WHITEFRIARS PRESS, LTD., LONDON AND TONBRIDGE.




_By S. HERBERT, M.D., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P._

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE

PHYSIOLOGY & PSYCHOLOGY OF SEX

Large Crown 8vo, with 49 Illustrations in the Text.
Price +7s. 6d.+ net (by post, 8/1).

     "For a simple statement, expressed in language as far as possible
     free from technicalities, of the principal phenomena of generation,
     Dr. Herbert's book is the best that we have seen."--_Cambridge
     Review._

     "It is therefore a real satisfaction to find a sex manual which may
     be placed with confidence in the hands of any educated person....
     He has certainly produced the best little manual which we yet
     possess in this field."--HAVELOCK ELLIS in _Eugenics Review_.


FUNDAMENTALS IN SEXUAL ETHICS

AN ENQUIRY INTO MODERN TENDENCIES

Large Crown 8vo, Cloth. Price +12s. 6d.+ net (by post, 13/4).

     "Dr. Herbert is a thoughtful and enlightened writer, fully informed
     with regard to the modern literature and modern research on sexual
     matters. He treats with knowledge all the urgent sexual questions
     and sexual phenomena, normal and abnormal, and attempts to
     construct a sexual ethic on biological and physiological
     facts."--_The Times._

     " ... the book is a successful attempt to deal with a difficult
     subject, and it deserves to be widely read."--_The Prescriber._


THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF HEREDITY

Second Edition, Large Crown 8vo, containing 75 Illustrations.
Price +7s. 6d.+ net (by post, 8/1).

     "We have only praise for the result of Dr. Herbert's attempt to
     provide us with a simple and brief, but at the same time scientific
     and comprehensive, survey of our present knowledge concerning the
     laws of heredity, their working and significance."--_Eugenics
     Review._


THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF EVOLUTION

Second Edition, Revised, Large Crown 8vo, containing 90 Illustrations.
Price +12s. 6d.+ net (by post, 13/6).

     "Contains not a single dry page--far and away the most compact and
     complete account of evolution in all its aspects."--_Globe._


_By Mrs. S. HERBERT._

SEX LORE. A Primer on Courtship, Marriage, and Parenthood.

Large Crown 8vo, containing 55 Illustrations.
Price +7s. 6d.+ net (by post, 8/1).

     "The author in simple, non-technical language expounds the main
     facts of sex, especially with regard to biology and physiology, and
     she treats this delicate subject in a tactful manner. A special
     feature of the book is the large number of illustrations. The
     volume is intended for the 'younger generation,' but parents and
     teachers would be well advised to peruse the book, which should
     prove invaluable for educative purposes."--_Medical Times._

     " ... may be left with confidence in the hands of any educated
     person who is attaining to manhood or womanhood."--_Aberdeen Daily
     Journal._


PUBLISHED BY

A. & C. BLACK, LTD., 4, 5 & 6 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W. 1




THE NEW HORIZON IN LOVE AND LIFE

By Mrs. HAVELOCK ELLIS

WITH A PREFACE BY EDWARD CARPENTER AND AN INTRODUCTION BY MARGUERITE
TRACY

_Demy 8vo._      PRICE +10/6+ NET      (_By Post, 11s._)


CONTENTS

PART I

LOVE AND MARRIAGE

THE LOVE OF TO-MORROW
A NOVICIATE FOR MARRIAGE
SEMI-DETACHED MARRIAGE
MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE
EUGENICS AND THE MYSTICAL OUTLOOK
EUGENICS AND SPIRITUAL PARENTHOOD
BLOSSOMING-TIME
LOVE AS A FINE ART


PART II

THE NEW CIVILISATION

DEMOCRACY IN THE KITCHEN
THE MASSES AND THE CLASSES
THE MATERNAL IN DOMESTIC AND POLITICAL LIFE
POLITICAL MILITANCY: ITS CAUSE AND CURE
WAR: AN ANCIENT VIRTUE AND A MODERN VICE
THE NEW CIVILISATION
THE PHILOSOPHY OF HAPPINESS
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX

     "Mrs. Havelock Ellis has written a fine and beautiful book,
     although many of her ideas appear too Utopian to be practical. It
     is thoughtful and pure in tone, offering no inducement to the
     prurient of mind, and her chapter on 'Blossoming-Time'--the tactful
     enlightenment of children--is a lovely piece of literature. It
     makes one long for a new and perfect world, in which all minds
     shall be pure and all passion fine and clean."--_The Statesman._

     " ... it will do everyone good to read and ponder it."--_Truth._

PUBLISHED BY

A. & C. BLACK, LTD., 4, 5 & 6 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W. 1



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEXUAL LIFE OF PRIMITIVE PEOPLE***


******* This file should be named 58475-8.txt or 58475-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/8/4/7/58475


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Good Hope, by Herman Heijermans, Jr.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Good Hope
       (In "The Drama: A Quarterly Review of Dramatic Literature")

Author: Herman Heijermans, Jr.

Commentator: Ashley Dukes

Translator: Harriet Gampert Higgins

Release Date: December 14, 2018 [EBook #58473]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOOD HOPE ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                               THE DRAMA

               A QUARTERLY REVIEW OF DRAMATIC LITERATURE

                NO. 8           NOVEMBER           1912



                             THE GOOD HOPE.

                    A DRAMA OF THE SEA IN FOUR ACTS.

                       BY HERMAN HEIJERMANS, JR.

                 TRANSLATED BY HARRIET GAMPERT HIGGINS.








THE PLAYS OF HERMAN HEIJERMANS.


To those content with convenient superficialities the plays of a
dramatist such as Heijermans are easy of definition. He is dismissed
as "a realistic writer," "a playwright of the naturalistic school,"
a follower of Ibsen, or Hauptmann, or Tolstoy, or Zola. Even then,
perhaps, the definitions are not exhausted. They spring from the
encyclopedia of commonplaces, and are as chaotic as the minds of their
authors. There is the adjective "meticulous," for example,--invaluable
to critics. And "morbid,"--equally indispensable, in the form of
"morbid psychology." "Photographic" and "kinematographic" must not be
forgotten; the latter an almost brand-new weapon of offence. For the
rest, "grey," "faithful," "squalid" or "lifelike" will serve their
turn, according to the critic's point of view.

In phrases such as these we hear the echoes of a controversy now a
generation old; a controversy dating back to the "free theatres" of
the 1890 period in Paris, Berlin and London, the first performances of
Ibsen's "Ghosts," and the early plays of Hauptmann and Strindberg. Then
the issues between Realist and Philistine were sharply defined;
the very terms were mutually exclusive. To be modern, to be "free,"
was to be an Ibsenite, an apostle of moral indignation, an author or
playgoer burning to lay bare social hypocrisies and shams; not merely
pour épater le bourgeois, but in order to assert the Great Truths
of Actual Life, so recently discovered by the stage. It mattered
little that Ibsenites owed their existence to their misunderstanding
of Ibsen. He had supplied them with an essential war cry. The old
domination of insincere sentiment and false romance in the theatre
was indefensible and insupportable. All the enthusiasm of dramatic
reformers was perforce directed to the advance of the new realistic
movement. Hence arose a battle of epithets between the two camps,
with "antiquated," "conventional," "sentimental," "romantic" on the
one hand, and "vulgar," "dreary," "indecent," "noisome" on the other.

In Anglo-Saxon countries, naturally enough, the issue was made one of
morality rather than artistic method. Ibsen's views on marriage were
suspect, and the whole dramatic movement lay in quarantine. Indeed,
realism in literature came to be regarded as an unsettling tendency,
emanating from the Continent, and directed against all British
institutions from property to religion. The division of opinion may
be studied in historical documents such as the criticisms of the
London Press on the first English performance of "Hedda Gabler," and
the early prefaces of Bernard Shaw; the one side tilting at realism,
the other at romance;--both, alas, the most shifty of windmills where
morality is concerned.

The provocative cry of "naturalism," raised by the newer dramatists and
their supporters, was responsible for half the trouble. A naturalist,
in good English usage, is taken to be a professor with a butterfly net
or an inquirer into the lower forms of pond life; and there is a good
deal to be said for the analogy as applied to the author of realistic
literature. Pins and chloroform may be his implements of tragedy; his
coldly scientific method gives point to the comparison. Undoubtedly
the "naturalistic drama" suggested probable inhumanity and possible
horror. In any case it clearly offered no hope of an enjoyable evening,
and was condemned from the first to be unpopular.

So much for the misconception encouraged by a purely journalistic
phrase. Useless to maintain that the older dramatists, from
Robertson and Dumas fils to Sardou, held a monopoly of the milk
of human kindness, while Ibsen, Hauptmann, Tolstoy and Strindberg
wallowed in mere brutal, original sin. The alleged "naturalism" of
the latter belied its name. It ranged from revolutionary Utopianism
to the creation of most unnatural giants,--stage characters removed
from the average of everyday life by their own distinction. Indeed,
the differences between the old school and the new were as nothing
compared with the intellectual gulf between, say, Strindberg and
Tolstoy. Setting out from the common ground of external approximation
to life, the dramatists of the period soon diverged upon individual
paths. Hauptmann passed from the vivid and revolutionary "Weavers"
to the mythology of "Hannele" and the "Sunken Bell," and the simple
domestic drama of "Fuhrmann Henschel" and "Rose Bernd." Tolstoy became
a preacher; Strindberg a Swedenborgian mystic. Of the early playwrights
of the French Théâtre Libre, Courteline and Ancey, practised the
Comédie rosse, or brutal comedy, until Paris, tired of the uncouth
novelty, turned to the more amiable and no less natural work of Capus
and Donnay. Brieux devoted himself to the composition of dramatic
tracts. Bernard Shaw, after protesting that he "could none other" than
dramatize slum landlords and rent collectors in "Widowers' Houses,"
found readier targets for his wit in bishops, professors of Greek and
millionaires. Nature, in fact, proved too strong for naturalism. No
formula could embrace all the individual playwrights of that stormy
time. The most catholic of "schools" could not hold them.

Formulas, however, die hard; and it is still necessary to free
Heijermans from the "naturalistic" label so conveniently attached in
1890 to works like Tolstoy's "Power of Darkness," Hauptmann's Vor
Sonnenaufgang and Zola's "Therèse Raquin." All that his plays have
in common with theirs is a faithful observation of life, and more
particularly of life among the common people. Moreover, he belongs
to a newer generation. He had written several short pieces (notably
Ahasuerus and 'n Jodenstreek?) in 1893 and 1894, but "The Ghetto"
(1899) was his first important play. This three-act tragedy of the
Jewish quarter in a Dutch city has been published in an English
adaptation which woefully misrepresents the original, and I should
rather refer readers to a German translation (Berlin, Fleische)
revised by Heijermans himself. Like most early work, the play did
not satisfy its author, and several versions exist.

The story is simple enough. Rafael, the son of an old Jewish merchant,
has an intrigue with the Gentile maidservant, Rose. His father,
Sachel, lives in an atmosphere of mistrust, hard dealing, thievery;
a patriarch with all the immemorial wrongs of the ghetto upon his
shoulders, and all the racial instinct to preserve property, family
and religion from contact with "strange people." He is blind, but
in the night he has heard the lovers' footsteps in the house. Rose
has lied to him; Rafael, as usual, is neglecting his business for
Gentile companions. So the play opens. After some bargaining over
the dowry, a marriage is arranged for Rafael with the daughter of
another merchant. The authority of the Rabbi is called in, but Rafael
refuses. He is a freethinker; in the ghetto, but not of it. "Oh,
these little rooms of yours,--these hot, stifling chambers of despair,
where no gust of wind penetrates, where the green of the leaves grows
yellow, where the breath chokes and the soul withers! No, let me speak,
Rabbi Haeser! Now I am the priest; I, who am no Jew and no Christian,
who feel God in the sunlight, in the summer fragrance, in the gleam of
the water and the flowers upon my mother's grave ... I have pity for
you, for your mean existence, for your ghettos and your little false
gods--for the true God is yet to come, the God of the new community;
the commonwealth without gods, without baseness, without slaves!"

Sachel is blamed for allowing this open rupture to come about. It
is better to pay the girl off quietly and have done with her,
argue the other Jews. Every woman has her price--and especially
every Gentile woman. A hundred gulden--perhaps two hundred if she
is obstinate--will settle the matter. The money is offered, but Rose
is not to be bought. She has promised to go away with Rafael as his
wife. He has gone out, but he will return for her. The family tell
her that the money is offered with his consent; that he is tired of
her and has left home for good. But she is unmoved. She has learned
to mistrust the word of the Jews; she will only believe their sacred
oath. At last old Sachel swears by the roll of the commandments that
his son will not return. In despair, Rose throws herself into the
canal and is drowned. Rafael comes too late to save her. The God of
the Jews has taken his revenge.

The play is perhaps a little naïve and crudely imagined, but it
has all the essential characteristics of Heijermans' later work;
the intense humanitarian feeling, the burning rhetoric, the frankly
partisan denunciation of society. Indeed, it could not be otherwise. In
dealing with such a case of bigotry and racial intolerance, it is
idle for a playwright to hold the scales with abstract justice. At
most he can only humanise the tragedy by humanising the villains of
his piece, and showing them driven into cruelty by traditional forces
beyond their control. That is the part of the "Ankläger," the social
prophet and Public Prosecutor; and it is the part which Heijermans,
above all others, has filled in the newer dramatic movement.

In Het Pantser ("The Coat of Mail") his subject is the life of a Dutch
garrison town. "The Coat of Mail" is militarism; the creed of the
governing caste. And the setting is peculiarly apt for the presentation
of a social issue. In a small country such as Holland military
patriotism may be strong, but it is tempered by the knowledge that the
country only exists by the tolerance, or the diplomatic agreement, of
more powerful neighbours, and that in case of war it could do no more
than sacrifice an army to the invader. To the philosophic workman,
then, well read in revolutionary literature from Marx to Kropotkin,
the standing army presents itself simply as a capitalist tool, a
bulwark of the employing class against trade unionism. The industrial
struggle is uncomplicated by sentimentality. Patriotic stampedes to the
conservative side are unknown. Social Democracy is strong. Strikes are
frequent, and the protection of "blackleg" labourers is in the hands
of the garrison. That is the theme of this "romantic military play."

Mari, a second lieutenant, refuses to serve on strike duty. He is a
weak but sincere idealist; his head full of humanitarian enthusiasm,
his rooms stocked with anti-militarist pamphlets. He will leave the
army rather than order his men to fire on the factory workers. Around
him stand the members of the military caste, linked together by
tradition and family relationship. His father is a colonel in the same
regiment; the father of his fiancée, Martha, is commanding officer. One
friend he has: an army doctor named Berens, who has infected himself
with cancer serum in attempting to discover a cure for the disease,
and passes for a drunkard because he keeps the symptoms in check by
alcohol. Here a parallel is drawn between military bravery and the
civilian courage of the scientist.

Mari is put under arrest, but the affair is kept secret in order to
avoid a scandal. He can only be reinstated by full withdrawal and
apology. Martha comes to him and implores him to withdraw. The strike
is thought to be over. He can plead the excitement of the moment
in excuse, and the matter will be settled honorably. He gives way
and apologises. A friendly discussion of the point with his superior
officers is interrupted by a volley in the street outside. The troops
have fired upon the mob, and the son of the shoemaker over the way
has been shot.

Mari sends in his papers; but a newspaper has published the facts of
the case, and he is met with the disgrace of immediate dismissal from
the army. This does not suit Martha. She must marry a soldier; civilian
life with a dismissed lieutenant was not in the bond. So Mari suffers
another disillusionment, and the end of the play sees him setting
out from home, while the old shoemaker is left to lament for his son.

And the sum total of it all? A warm heart, a weakness for rhetoric,
and--a study in vacillation.

In Ora et Labora Heijermans is less rhetorical; rather, one suspects,
for lack of a mouthpiece. His peasants bear their fate, if not in
silence, with almost inarticulate resignation. They are too hungry to
waste words. Moreover, there is no visible enemy to denounce, no Coat
of Mail, no racial prejudice, no insatiate capitalism. Winter is the
villain of the piece. This is indeed naturalism, in the literal sense;
humanity devoured by Nature. Everything is frost-bound: the canal,
the soil, the very cattle. The barges are idle. There is no work and
no warmth. When the last cow upon the farm dies of disease, its throat
is cut so that it can be sold to the butcher. All hopes are centred
in the father of the family, who is to sell the carcase in the town;
but he spends the money and returns home drunk. As a last resort,
his son Eelke enlists in the army for six years' colonial service,
leaving Sytske, the girl he was about to marry. His advance pay buys
fuel and food, but the lovers part with a hopeless quarrel, and the
old peasants are left wrangling over the money he has brought.

Allerzielen (1906) is a later work. A village pastor finds a woman
in a state of collapse upon his threshold. He takes her in, and she
gives birth to a child. She is a stranger in the district, Rita by
name. The child is sent into the village to be nursed, while the
pastor gives up his own room to the mother. She recovers slowly, and
meanwhile the peasants set their tongues to work upon the scandal. The
child is discovered to be illegitimate. A good village housewife is
suckling a bastard. The pastor is housing an outcast, and shows no
sign of sending her about her business. The neighbouring clergy are
perturbed. Dimly and distantly the Bishop is said to be considering
the facts.... Amid alarums and excursions the affair pursues its
course. The village passes from astonishment to ribaldry, from ribaldry
to stone-throwing. The pastor speaks gently of Christian charity and
souls to be saved, but fails to appease his parishioners. They are
hot upon the scent in a heresy-hunt. If they could see within the
parsonage walls, they would yelp still louder. For Rita proves to be
an unblushing hedonist. No prayers for her, when the birth-pangs are
once over; no tears, no repentance. She sings gaily in her room while
the pastors argue about duty and morals. She feels "heavenly." She
invades the study to enjoy a view of sunlight, clouds and sea. She
finds the waves more musical than the wheezing of the church organ. If
only the child were with her, her happiness would be complete.

But the child is neglected by its foster mother. It sickens and
dies. The pastor is driven from his church by the Bishop, and leaves
the broken windows of the parsonage to his successor. Rita and he
are both homeless now. And then the child's father comes,--another
hedonist. The child is dead, but Life remains. Its body lies in
unconsecrated ground, but the vows of love are renewed at the
graveside. The Church can only crush its own slaves. All roads are
open to the spirits of the free. The pastor can only offer a hopeless
"Farewell" as the two set out upon their way. But Rita calls after,
"No,--no! You will come over to us."

It matters nothing that this gospel of Life has often been
preached. Heijermans has caught the spirit of it as well as the
letter. His characters say and do nothing particularly original;
nothing that would even pass for originality by reason of its
manner. He works in vivid contrasts, without a shade of paradox. He
figures the opposed forces of Reaction and Revolution in religion,
in statecraft, in economics, in all human relationships, with a
simplicity of mind which would draw a smile from the forever up-to-date
"intellectual." Reaction is a devilish superstition; Revolution
a prophetic angel pointing the way to the promised land. The one
is false, the other true. There is no disputing the point, since
truth and falsehood are absolute terms. Perhaps the secret is that
Heijermans never tires of his own philosophy. He is content to see it
firmly planted on the ground; he does not demand that it should walk
the tight-rope or turn somersaults as an intellectual exercise. He
has accepted a view of life which some call materialistic, and others
positivist, or scientific, or humanitarian; but for him it is simply
humane,--founded upon social justice and human need.

A philosophy, however, does not make a dramatist. In the plays I
have already described Heijermans shows his power of translating
the world-struggle of thought into the dramatic clash of will, but
it is upon "The Good Hope" (Op Hoop van Zegen) that his reputation
chiefly depends. He chooses a great subject; not merely the conflict
of shipowners and fishermen in the struggle for existence, but the
sea-faring life and the ocean itself. Truly "a sea-piece"; tempestuous,
powerful. One can hear the breaking of the waves. From the opening
scene, with the old men's tale of sharks, to the night of the storm
in the third act, when the women and children huddle in Kneirtje's
cottage for shelter, the story is always the same. The sea is the
symbol of Fate. It takes a father here, a brother there. It seizes
Geert and Barend alike; the one going aboard carelessly, the other
screaming resistance. Sometimes it plays with its victims on shore,
making no sign, leaving months of hope to end in despair. In a more
merciful mood it sends children running through the village to cry
"'n Ball op! 'n Ball op!" as an overdue ship is signalled from the
coastguard tower. And there an echo of the sea-ballad now and again;
when raps are heard upon the door at the height of the storm, or
a flapping curtain blows out the lamp, or a pallid face is seen at
the window....

In sheer force of theatrical construction "The Good Hope" is still
more striking. There are great moments, finely conceived. The play is
full of natural rather than violent coincidence. Barend has always
feared death by drowning, and he makes his first and last voyage in
a leaky trawler. His father sank in a wreck, and it is his mother,
unable to maintain the household, who persuades him to go. She fears
the disgrace of his refusal after the papers are signed, but he is
dragged aboard by the harbour police. His brother Geert sets out
proudly enough, singing the Marseillaise and preaching rebellion;
but he sinks far away, impotent, unheard, and leaves his sweetheart
to bear a fatherless child. Old Cobus can only reflect, "We take
the fishes, and God takes us." That is perhaps the most dramatic
thread of all,--the parallel of fate. The struggle for existence on
land drives men to the fishing-boats and the Dogger Bank. From the
minnows to leviathan, there is no escape. "We take the fishes, and
God takes us." A gale of wind and rain whistles through the play,
sweeping the decks of life, tossing men out into the unknown.

Let us turn to the social standpoint. The ship-owner, Bos, is frankly
a villain. He knows "The Good Hope" is unseaworthy, but he allows her
to sail. True, the warning comes from a drunken ship's carpenter,
but he understands the risks. Business is business. The ship is
well insured....

It is implied, then, that shipowners are unscrupulous scoundrels,
and fishermen their unhappy victims. Here is a bias which makes
the actual tragedy no more impressive. Good ships, as well as bad,
may perish in a storm. Nature is cruel enough without the help of
man. The problem of the big fish and the little fish is one of size,
not of morality. Even sharks may possibly rejoice in an amiable
temperament. It can only be said that Heijermans has here chosen the
right motive for his own particular type of drama. His sympathy is
with the fishermen. He knows that, humanly speaking, in every conflict
between employers and employed, the men are right and the masters
wrong. Impossible to redress the balance by individual virtue or
kindliness. The masters stand for the exploiting system; for capital,
for insurance, for power, for law and order and possession. Their
risks are less and their temptations greater. Even from the standpoint
of abstract justice, a dishonest employer may fairly be set against
a drunken labourer or a gaol-bird fisherman. The one is no less
natural than the other. But Heijermans goes beyond all finicking
considerations of this sort. He seeks to destroy and rebuild, not
to repair or adjust. He avoids mere naturalism; the "conscientious
transcription of all the visible and repetition of all the audible"
is not for him. And here he is undoubtedly justified, not only by
his own experience, but by that of other dramatists. There was no
inspiration in the movement towards mere actuality on the stage. It
sickened of its own surfeit of "life." Its accumulated squalor became
intolerable. It was choked by its own irrelevance, circumscribed
by its own narrowness. For naturalism is like a prison courtyard;
it offers only two ways of escape. One is the poet's upward flight,
the other the revolutionist's battering-ram. Heijermans has chosen
his own weapon, and used it well. He has given us "The Good Hope,"
not as a mere pitiful study in disillusionment, but as a tragic symbol
of human effort in the conquest of despair.

        Ashley Dukes.








                             THE GOOD HOPE.

                    A Drama of the Sea in Four Acts.

                       By Herman Heijermans, Jr.

                 Translated by Harriet Gampert Higgins.





PERSONS.


    Kneirtje, a fisherman's widow.
    Geert   }
    Barend  }  her sons.
    Jo, her niece.
    Cobus, her brother.
    Daantje, from the Old Men's Home.
    Clemens Bos, a ship owner.
    Clementine, his daughter.
    Mathilde, his wife.
    Simon, a ship carpenter's assistant.
    Marietje, his daughter.
    Mees, Marietje's betrothed.
    Kaps, a bookkeeper.
    Saart, a fisherman's widow.
    Truus, a fisherman's wife.
    Jelle, a beggar.
    First Policeman.
    Second Policeman.


The Drama is laid in a North Sea fishing village.

Copyright 1912 by The Dramatic Publishing Company.








                             THE GOOD HOPE

                    A Drama of the Sea in Four Acts.

                       By Herman Heijermans, Jr.


ACT I.


[Kneirtje's home, a poor living-room. At the left, two wall bedsteads
and a door; to the right, against the wall, a chest of drawers
with holy images, vases and photographs. A chimney fireplace nearer
front. At the back wall, near right corner, a wicket leading to the
cooking shed; at left against the wall a cupboard; a cage with dove;
window with flower pots, left of center; in back wall right of center a
door overlooking a narrow cobblestone roadway backed by a view of beach
with sea in middle distance and horizon. Through the window to the left
is seen the red tiled lower corner of roof of a cottage. Time, noon.]

CLEMENTINE. [Sketch book on her knee.] Now, then! Cobus!

COBUS. [Who poses, awakes with a start, smiles.] He-he-he! I wasn't
asleep--No, no--

CLEM. Head this way--still more--what ails you now? You were sitting
so natural. Hand on the knee again.

COBUS. Tja--when you sit still so long--you get stiff.

CLEM. [Impatiently.] Please! please! stop chewing.

COB. I haven't any chew. Look.

CLEM. Then keep your mouth shut.

DAANTJE. [Entering by the cooking shed.] Good day.

CLEM. Good day. Take a walk around the corner.

DAAN. No, Miss--time's up. [Looking at sketch.] It don't look like
him yet.

CLEM. [Smiling.]

DAAN. [Shifting his spectacles.] You see--if I may take the liberty,
Miss--his chin sets different--and his eyes don't suit me--but his
nose--that's him--and--and--his necktie, that's mighty natural--I'd
swear to that anywhere.

CLEM. Indeed.

DAAN. And the bedstead with the curtains--that's fine. Now, Miss,
don't you think you could use me?

CLEM. Perhaps. Hand higher--keep your mouth still.

COB. That's easy said--but when y'r used to chewing and ain't allowed
to--then you can't hold your lips still--what do you say, Daantje?

DAAN. I say time's up. We eat at four and the matron is strict.

CLEM. That will be necessary with you old fellows.

DAAN. Peh! We've a lot to bring in, haven't we? An Old Man's Home is a
jail--scoldings with your feed--as if y'r a beggar. Coffee this morning
like the bottom of the rain barrel--and peas as hard as y'r corns.

CLEM. If I were in your place--keep your mouth still--I'd thank God
my old age was provided for.

COB. Tja--tja--I don't want to blaspheme, but--

DAAN. Thank God?--Not me--sailed from my tenth year--voyages--more
than you could count--suffered shipwreck--starvation--lost two sons
at sea--no--no. I say the matron is a beast--I'd like to slap her jaw.

CLEM. That will do! This is no dive.

DAAN. I know that, but it makes your gorge rise. I wasn't allowed to
go out last week because, begging your pardon, I missed and spat beside
the sand box. Now I ask, would you spit beside a box on purpose? An old
man's home is a jail--and when they've shut you up, in one of them,
decent, they're rid of you. Wish the sharks had eaten me before I
quit sailing.

COB. [Giggling.] He! he! he! Man, the sharks wouldn't eat you--you
were too tough for them.

CLEM. Keep your lips still!

COB. Tja, tja.

DAAN. Sharks not like me--They'll swallow a corpse. Peh! I saw old
Willem bitten in two till the blood spouted on high. And he was a
thin man.

CLEM. Was old Willem eaten by a shark?

DAAN. By one? By six. Quick as he fell overboard they grabbed him. The
water was red.

CLEM. Hey! How frightful. And yet--I'd rather like to see a thing
like that.

DAAN. Like to see it! We had to.

CLEM. Did he scream?

DAAN. Did he scream!

COB. Tja, wouldn't you if you felt the teeth in your flesh? He--hehe!

[Sound of a fiddle is heard outside. Cobus sways in his chair in time
to the tune.] Ta da da de--da da da--

CLEM. [Hastily closing the sketch book.] There then! [Rises.] Tomorrow
you sit still--You hear!

COB. [Stretching himself.] All stiff! [Dances, snapping his fingers,
his knees wabbling.] Ta de da da--da-da-da.

DAAN. [At the window.] Psst! Nobody home.

JELLE. [Playing at window outside.] If you please.

DAAN. Nobody home.

JELLE. I come regular once a week.

DAAN. They have gone to the harbor.

CLEM. [Throws a coin out of the window.] There! [Playing stops.]

JELLE. Thank you. [Searches for the coin.]

COB. Behind that stone, stupid.

DAAN. No; more that way.

CLEM. I threw it out that way. Hey! what a donkey! Is he near-sighted?

COB. He's got only half an eye--and with half an eye you don't see
much. [To Jelle.] Behind you!

JELLE. I don't see anything.

DAAN. [Barend appears at door.] Psst! Hey! Barend, you help him----

CLEM. There is a ten-cent piece out there.

BAREND. [Basket of driftwood on his back.] Give it to 'im in his paws
then. [Enters.] [Throws down basket with a thud.] Here!

COB. Did you hear that impudent boy?

CLEM. Say there, big ape, were you speaking to me?

BAR. [Shy and embarrassed.] No, Miss. I did not know you were there,
I thought----

COB. What right had you to think--better be thinking of going to sea
again to earn your Mother's bread.

BAR. That's none of your business.

COB. Just hear his insolence to me--when he's too bashful to open
his mouth to others. [Taunting.] I'm not afraid--he-he-he!--No,
I don't get the belly ache when I must go to sea--he-he-he!

DAAN. Come along now. It's struck four.

CLEM. Ten o'clock tomorrow, Cobus.

DAAN. He can't do it, Miss, we must pull weeds in the court yard.

COB. Yes, we must scratch the stones.

CLEM. Tomorrow afternoon, then.

COB. Tja! I'll be here, then. Good day, Miss. [To Barend.] Good day,
pudding breeches.

CLEM. [Pinning on her hat.] He teases you, doesn't he?

BAR. [Laughing bashfully.] Yes, Miss.

CLEM. Been out searching the beach? [He nods embarrassed.] Found much?

BAR. No, it was ebb last night--and--and--[Gets stuck.]

CLEM. Are you really afraid to go to sea, silly boy? [He nods,
laughing.] They all go.

BAR. [Dully.] Yes, they all go.

CLEM. A man must not be afraid----

BAR. No, a man must not be afraid.

CLEM. Well, then?

BAR. [Timidly.] I'd rather stay on shore.

CLEM. I won't force you to go--How old are you?

BAR. Rejected for the army last month.

CLEM. Rejected?

BAR. For my--for my--I don't know why, but I was rejected.

CLEM. [Laughing.] That's lucky--A soldier that's afraid!

BAR. [Flaring up quickly.] I'm not afraid on land--let them come at
me--I'll soon stick a knife through their ribs!

CLEM. Fine!

BAR. [Again lapsing into embarrassment.] Beg pardon, Miss. [The soft
tooting of a steamboat whistle is heard.] That's the Anna--there's
a corpse on board----

CLEM. Another one dead?

BAR. The flag hung half-mast.

CLEM. Tu-tu-tu-tu--The second this week. First, the Agatha Maria----

BAR. No, 'twas the Charlotte.

CLEM. Oh, yes! The Agatha was last week--Do they know who? [He shakes
his head.] Haven't you any curiosity?

BAR. Ach--you get used to it--and none of our family are
aboard. [Embarrassed silence.] Father can't--Hendrick can't--Josef
can't--you know about them--and--and--Geert--he's still under arrest.

CLEM. Yes, he's brought disgrace on all of you.

BAR. Disgrace--disgrace----

CLEM. When is he free?

BAR. I don't know.

CLEM. You don't know?

BAR. They gave him six months--but they deduct the time before
trial--we don't know how long that was, so we can't tell.

KNEIRTJE. [Through the window.] Good day, Miss.

CLEM. Good day.

KNEIR. How did the chickens get out? Do look at that rooster! Get out,
you salamander! Kischt! Jo! Jo!

BAR. Let them alone. They'll go of themselves.

KNEIR. [Entering the room.] That's an endless devilment, Miss. [To
Barend.] Come, you, stick out your paws. Must we have another row
with Ari?

BAR. Then we'll have a row. [Goes off indifferently, chases away the
chickens, outside.]

KNEIR. Then we'll--such a lazy boy, I wish he'd never been
born--Sponger!--Are you going so soon, Miss?

CLEM. I am curious to know what's happened on the Anna.

KNEIR. Yes--I was on the way there--but it takes so long--and I've
had my fill of waiting on the pier--if that pier could only talk. Have
you finished my brother's portrait?

CLEM. Tomorrow. I want to make a drawing of Barend also--just as he
came in with the basket on his shoulders.

KNEIR. Barend? Well--All the same to me.

CLEM. He doesn't seem to get much petting around here.

KNEIR. [Annoyed.] Pet him! I should say not! The sooner I get rid of
him, the better! [Through the window.] Chase them away! Kischt! Kischt!

BAR. [Outside.] All that yelling makes the rooster afraid.

KNEIR. Afraid! He takes after you, then! Kischt!

CLEM. Hahaha! Hahaha! Say, he's enjoying himself there on Ari's roof.

JO. [Coming through the door at left. Brown apron--gold head pieces
on the black band around her head.] Good day.

KNEIR. The chickens are out again! The rooster is sitting on Ari's
roof.

JO. [Laughing merrily.] Hahaha! He's not going to lay eggs there!

KNEIR. [Crossly.] Hear her talk! She knows well enough we almost came
to blows with Ari because the hens walked in his potato patch.

JO. I let them out myself, old cross patch--Truus dug their potatoes
yesterday.

KNEIR. Why didn't you say so then?

JO. What am I doing now? Oh, Miss--she would die if she couldn't
grumble; she even keeps it up in her sleep. Last night she swore out
loud in her dreams. Hahaha! Never mind! scold all you like; you're a
good old mother just the same. [To Barend, who enters the room.] Ach,
you poor thing! Is the rooster setting on the roof? And does he refuse
to come down?

BAR. You quit that now!

JO. I'll wager if you pet the hens he will come down of himself from
jealousy. Hahaha! He looks pale with fear.

CLEM. Now, now.

JO. Say, Aunt, you should make a baker of him. His little bare feet
in the rye flour. Hahaha!

BAR. You can all----[Goes angrily off at left.]

JO. [Calling after him.] The poor little fellow!

CLEM. Now, stop teasing him. Are you digging potatoes?

JO. Tja; since four o'clock this morning. Nothing--Aunt--all rotten.

KNEIR. We poor people are surely cursed--rain--rain--the crops had
to rot--they couldn't be saved--and so we go into the winter--the
cruel winter--Ach,--Ach,--Ach!

JO. There! You're worrying again. Come, Mother, laugh. Am I ever
sad? Geert may return at any moment.

KNEIR. Geert--and what then?

JO. What then? Then--then--then, nothing! Cheer up! You don't add
to your potatoes by fretting and grumbling. I have to talk like this
all day to keep up her spirits--See, I caught a rabbit!

CLEM. In a trap?

JO. As neat as you please. The rascal was living on our poverty--the
trap went snap as I was digging. A fat one--forty cents at the least.

CLEM. That came easy--I must go now.

BOS. [At door.] Hello! Are you going to stay all day--May I come in?

KNEIR. [Friendly manner.] Of course you may, Meneer; come in, Meneer.

BOS. My paws are dirty, children.

KNEIR. That's nothing. A little dry sand doesn't matter--will you
sit down?

BOS. Glad to do so--Yes, Kneir, my girl, we're getting older every
day--Good day, little niece.

JO. Good day, Meneer. [Points, laughing, to her hands.] You see----

BOS. Have you put on gloves for the dance?

JO. [Nods saucily.] The hornpipe and the Highland fling, hey?

BOS. Hahaha! Saucy black eye. [To Clementine.] Come, let me have
a look.

CLEM. [Petulantly.] No, you don't understand it, anyway.

BOS. Oh, thanks!--You educate a daughter. Have her take drawing
lessons, but must not ask to see--come! Don't be so childish!

CLEM. [With spoiled petulance.] No. When it is finished.

BOS. Just one look.

CLEM. Hey, Pa, don't bother me.

BOS. Another scolding, ha ha ha!

[Barend enters.]

BAR. [Bashfully.] Good day, Meneer.

BOS. Well, Barend, you come as if you were called.

BAR. [Surprised laugh.] I?

BOS. We need you, my boy.

BAR. Yes, Meneer.

BOS. The deuce! How you have grown.

BAR. Yes, Meneer.

BOS. You're quite a man, now--How long have you been out of a job?

BAR. [Shyly.] Nine months.

KNEIR. That's a lie--It's more than a year.

BAR. No, it isn't.

JO. Well, just count up--November, December--

BOS. That'll do, children. No quarreling. Life is too short. Well,
Barend, how would the forty-seven suit you?--Eh, what?----

BAR. [Anxiously.] The forty-seven----

BOS. The Good Hope----

CLEM. [Surprised.] Are you going to send out the Good Hope?----

BOS. [Sharply.] You keep out of this! Keep out, I say!

CLEM. And this morning----

BOS. [Angrily.] Clementine!

CLEM. But Pa----

BOS. [Angrily stamping his foot.] Will you please go on?

CLEM. [Shrugging her shoulders.] Hey! How contemptible, to get mad--how
small--Bonjour! [Exits.]

KNEIR. Good day, Miss.

BOS. [Smiling.] A cat, eh! Just like her Mama, I have to raise the
devil now and then,--hahaha!--or my wife and daughter would run
the business--and I would be in the kitchen peeling the potatoes,
hahaha! Not but what I've done it in my youth.

KNEIR. And don't I remember----

BOS. [Smacking his lips.] Potatoes and fresh herring! but what's
past is gone. With a fleet of eight luggers your mind is on other
things--[Smiling.] Even if I do like the sight of saucy black
eyes--Don't mind me, I'm not dangerous--there was a time.----Hahaha!

KNEIR. Go on, Meneer. Don't mind us.

BOS. Well, our little friend here, what does he say?

KNEIR. Open your mouth, speak!

BAR. I would rather----

KNEIR. [Angrily.] Rather--rather!

JO. Hey! What a stupid!----

BOS. Children! No quarreling. Boy, you must decide for yourself. Last
year at the herring catch the Good Hope made the sum of fourteen
hundred guilders in four trips. She is fully equipped, Hengst is
skipper--all the sailors but one--and the boys--Hengst spoke of you
for oldest boy.

BAR. [Nervously.] No, no, Meneer----

KNEIR. Ah, the obstinate beast! All my beating won't drive him aboard.

JO. If I were a man----

BOS. Yes, but you're not; you're a pretty girl--ha, ha, ha! We can't
use such sailors. Well, Daddy! And why don't you want to go? Afraid
of seasickness? You've already made one trip as middle boy----

KNEIR. And as play boy.

JO. He'd rather loaf and beg. Ah! what a big baby.

BOS. You are foolish, boy. I sailed with your grandfather. Yes, I,
too, would rather have sat by Mother's pap-pot than held eels with
my ice cold hands; rather bitten into a slice of bread and butter
than bitten off the heads of the bait. And your father----

BAR. [Hoarsely.] My father was drowned--and brother Hendrick--and
Josef--no, I won't go!

BOS. [Rising.] Well--if he feels that way--better not force him,
Mother Kneirtje; I understand how he feels, my father didn't die
in his bed, either--but if you begin to reason that way the whole
fishery goes up the spout.

KNEIR. [Angrily.] It's enough to----

BOS. Softly--softly--You don't catch tipsy herrings with force----

JO. [Laughing.] Tipsy herring, I would like to see that!

BOS. [Laughing.] She doesn't believe it, Kneir! We know better! Eh,
what!

KNEIR. Ach--it's no joking matter, Meneer, that miserable bad
boy talks as if--as if--I had forgotten my husband--and my good
Josef--and--and--but I have not. [Ends in low sobbing.]

JO. Come, foolish woman! please, Aunty dear!--Good-for-nothing Torment!

BOS. Don't cry, Kneir! Tears will not restore the dead to life----

KNEIR. No, Meneer--I know that, Meneer. Next month it will be twelve
years since the Clementine went down.

BOS. Yes, it was the Clementine.

KNEIR. November--'88--He was a monkey of seven then, and yet he
pretends to feel more than I do about it.

BAR. [Nervously.] I didn't say that. I don't remember my father,
nor my brothers--but--but----

BOS. Well, then?

BAR. I want another trade--I don't want to go to sea--no--no----

KNEIR. Another trade--What else can you do? Can't even read or
write----

BAR. Is that my fault?

KNEIR. No--it is mine, of course! Three years I had an allowance--the
first year three--the second two twenty-five--and the third one
dollar--the other nine I had to root around for myself.

BOS. Have you forgotten me entirely?

KNEIR. I shall always be grateful to you, Meneer. If you and the
priest hadn't given me work and a warm bite now and then to take
home--then--then--and that booby even reproaches me!----

BAR. I don't reproach--I--I----

JO. Out with it! The gentleman is looking for a place to live off
his income.

BAR. Shut up!--I will do anything--dig sand--plant broom--salting
down--I'll be a mason, or a carpenter--or errand boy----

JO. Or a burgomaster! Or a policeman! Hahaha! And walk about dark
nights to catch thieves--Oh!--Oh!--what a brave man!

BOS. Little vixen!

BAR. You make me tired!--Did I complain when the salt ate the flesh
off my paws so I couldn't sleep nights with the pain?

KNEIR. Wants to be a carpenter--the boy is insane--A mason--see the
accidents that happen to masons. Each trade has something.

BOS. Yes, Barendje--There are risks in all trades--my boy. Just think
of the miners, the machinists, the stokers--the--the--How often do
not I, even now, climb the man rope, or row out to a lugger? Fancies,
my boy! You must not give way to them.

KNEIR. And we have no choice. God alone knows what the winter will
be. All the potatoes rotted late this fall, Meneer.

BOS. Yes, all over the district. Well, boy?

BAR. No, Meneer.

KNEIR. [Angrily.] Get out of my house, then--sponger!

BAR. [Faintly.] Yes, Mother.

KNEIR. March! Or I'll----[Threatening.]

BOS. Come, come. [A pause during which Barend walks timidly away.]

JO. If I had a son like that----

BOS. Better get a lover first----

JO. [Brightly.] I've already got one!--If I had a son like that I'd
bang him right and left! Bah! A man that's afraid! [Lightly.] A sailor
never knows that sooner or later--He never thinks of that--If Geert
were that way--there, I know--Aunt, imagine--Geert----

BOS. Geert?----

JO. He'd face the devil--eh, Aunt? Now, I'm going to finish the
potatoes. Good bye, Meneer.

BOS. Say, black eyes--do you laugh all the time?

JO. [With burst of laughter.] No, I'm going to cry. [Calls back from
the opened door.] Aunt--speak of Geert. [Goes off.]

BOS. Geert?--Is that your son, who----

KNEIR. Yes, Meneer.

BOS. Six months?

KNEIR. Yes, Meneer.

BOS. Insubordination?

KNEIR. Yes, Meneer--Couldn't keep his hands at
home.

BOS. The stupid blockhead!

KNEIR. I think they must have teased him----

BOS. That's nonsense! They don't tease the marines. A fine state
of affairs. Discipline would be thrown overboard to the sharks if
sailors could deal out blows every time things didn't go to suit them.

KNEIR. That's so, Meneer, but----

BOS. And is she--smitten with that good-for-nothing?

KNEIR. She's crazy about him, and well she may be. He's a handsome
lad, takes after his father--and strong--there is his photograph--he
still wore the uniform then--first class--now he is----

BOS. Degraded?----

KNEIR. No, discharged--when he gets out. He's been to India twice--it
is hard--if he comes next week--or in two weeks--or tomorrow, I don't
know when--I'll have him to feed, too--although--I must say it of
him, he won't let the grass grow under his feet--A giant like him
can always find a skipper.

BOS. A sweet beast--I tell you right now, Kneir, I'd rather not take
him--dissatisfied scoundrels are plenty enough these days--All that
come from the Navy, I'm damned if it isn't so--are unruly and I have
no use for that kind--Am I not right?

KNEIR. Certainly, Meneer, but my boy----

BOS. There was Jacob--crooked Jacob, the skipper had to discharge
him. He was, God save him, dissatisfied with everything--claimed
that I cheated at the count--yes--yes--insane. Now he's trying it at
Maassluis. We don't stand for any nonsense.

KNEIR. May I send him to the skipper then--or direct to the water
bailiff's office?

BOS. Yes, but you tell him----

KNEIR. Yes, Meneer.

BOS. If he comes in time, he can go out on the Good Hope. She's just
off the docks. They are bringing the provisions and casks aboard
now. She'll come back with a full cargo--You know that.

KNEIR. [Glad.] Yes, Meneer.

BOS. Well--Good bye! [Murmur of voices outside.] What's that?

KNEIR. People returning from the harbor. There's a corpse aboard
the Anna.

BOS. Pieterse's steam trawler--The deuce! Who is it?

KNEIR. I don't know. I'm going to find out.

[Both go off--the stage remains empty--a vague murmur of voices
outside. Fishermen, in conversation, pass the window. Sound of
a tolling church bell. Geert sneaks inside through the door at
left. Throws down a bundle tied in a red handkerchief. Looks cautiously
into the bedsteads, the cooking shed, peers through the window, then
muttering he plumps down in a chair by the table, rests his head on
his hand, rises again; savagely takes a loaf of bread from the back
cupboard, cuts off a hunk. Walks back to chair, chewing, lets the
bread fall; wrathfully stares before him. The bell ceases to toll.]

BAR. [From the cooking shed.] Who's there?--Geert!--[Entering.]

GEERT. [Curtly.] Yes--it's me--Well, why don't you give me a paw.

BAR. [Shaking hands.] Have you--have you seen Mother yet?

GEERT. [Curtly.] No, where is she----

BAR. Mother, she--she----

GEERT. What are you staring at?

BAR. You--you--Have you been sick?

GEERT. Sick? I'm never sick.

BAR. You look so--so pale----

GEERT. Give me the looking-glass. I'll be damned. What a mug! [Throws
the mirror roughly down.]

BAR. [Anxiously.] Was it bad in prison?

GEERT. No, fine!--What a question--They feed you on beefsteaks! Is
there any gin in the house?

BAR. No.

GEERT. Go and get some then--if I don't have a swallow, I'll keel over.

BAR. [Embarrassed.] I haven't any money.

GEERT. I have. [Peers in his pocket, throws a handful of coins on
the table.] Earned that in prison--There!----

BAR. At the "Red" around the corner?

GEERT. I don't care a damn--so you hurry. [Calling after him.] Is--is
Mother well? [A pause.]--and Jo?

BAR. [At door.] She is digging potatoes.

GEERT. Are they mad at me?

BAR. Why?

GEERT. Because I--[Savagely.] Don't stare so, stupid----

BAR. [Embarrassed.] I can't get used to your face--it's so queer.

GEERT. Queer face, eh! I must grow a beard at once!--Say, did they
make a devil of a row? [Gruffly.] Well?----

BAR. I don't know.

GEERT. Go to the devil! You don't know anything.

[A pause, Barend slips out. Jo enters, a dead rabbit in her hand.]

JO. Jesus! [Lets the rabbit fall.]--Geert! [Rushes to him, throws
her arms about his neck, sobbing hysterically.]

GEERT. [In a muffled voice.] Stop it! Stop your damned bawling--stop!

JO. [Continuing to sob.] I am so happy--so happy, dear Geert----

GEERT. [Irritated.] Now! Now!

JO. I can't help it. [Sobs harder.]

GEERT. [Pulling her arms from his neck.]--Now then! My head can't
stand such a lot of noise----

JO. [Startled.] A lot of noise?

GEERT. [Grumbling.] You don't understand it of course--six months
solitary--in a dirty, stinking cell. [Puts his hand before his eyes
as if blinded by the light.] Drop the curtain a bit--This sunshine
drives me mad!

JO. My God--Geert----

GEERT. Please!--that's better.

JO. Your beard----

GEERT. They didn't like my beard--The government took that--become
ugly, haven't I?--Look as if I'd lost my wits? Eh?

JO. [With hesitating laugh.] You? No--What makes you think that? You
don't show it at all. [Sobs again softly.]

GEERT. Well, damn it! Is that all you have to say. [She laughs
hysterically. He points to his temples.] Become grey, eh?

JO. No, Geert.

GEERT. You lie. [Kicking away the mirror.] I saw it myself. The
beggars; to shut up a sailor in a cage where you can't walk, where you
can't speak, where you--[Strikes wildly upon the table with his fist.]

BAR. Here is the gin.

JO. The gin?

BAR. For Geert.

GEERT. Don't you meddle with this--Where is a glass?--Never
mind--[Swallows eagerly.]--That's a bracer! What time is it?

BAR. Half past four.

JO. Did you take bread? Were you hungry?

GEERT. Yes, no--no, yes. I don't know. [Puts the bottle again to
his lips.]

JO. Please, Geert--no more--you can't stand it.

GEERT. No more? [Swallows.] Ripping!--Hahaha! That's the best way
to tan your stomach. [Swallows.] Ripping! Don't look so unhappy,
girl--I won't get drunk! Bah! It stinks! Not accustomed to it--Are
there any provisions on board?

JO. Look--a fat one, eh? Trapped him myself. [Picks up the rabbit.] Not
dead an hour.

GEERT. That will do for tomorrow--Here, you, go and lay in a
supply--some ham and some meat----

BAR. Meat, Geert?

JO. No--that's extravagance--If you want to buy meat, keep your money
till Sunday.

GEERT. Sunday--Sunday--If you hadn't eaten anything for six months but
rye bread, rats, horse beans--I'm too weak to set one foot before the
other. Stop your talk--Hurry up! and--and a piece of cheese--I feel
like eating myself into a colic. Hahaha! Shall I take another wee drop?

[Barend goes off.]

JO. No.

GEERT. Good, not another drop. Is there any tobacco?

JO. God!--I'm glad to see you cheerful again. Yes, there's some
tobacco left--in the jar.

GEERT. That's good. Fine! Is that my old pipe?

JO. I saved it for you.

GEERT. Who did you flirt with, while I sat----

JO. [Merrily.] With Uncle Cobus!

GEERT. You women are all trash. [Fills his pipe; smokes.] Haven't
had the taste in my mouth for half a year. This isn't tobacco;
[Exhales.] tastes like hay--Bah! The gin stinks and the pipe stinks.

JO. Eat something first----

GEERT. [Laying down the pipe.] Say, do you still sleep with Mother?

JO. Yes, next to the pig stye.

GEERT. [Laughing.] And must I sleep under the roof again?

JO. You'll sleep nice and warm up there, dear.

KNEIR. [Outside.] Why is the window curtain down?

JO. [Finger on her lips.] Sst! [Goes and stands before Geert.]

KNEIR. [Inside.] What's going on here? Why is the looking-glass on
the floor? Who sits----

GEERT. [Rising.] Well, little old one!

KNEIR. God almighty!

GEERT. No--it's me--Geert----

KNEIR. [Dropping into a chair.] Oh!--Oh!--My heart beats so!

GEERT. Hahaha! That's damned good! [Tries to embrace her.]

KNEIR. No--no--not yet--later.

GEERT. Not yet?--Why later?

KNEIR. [Reproachfully.] You--what have you done to make me happy!

JO. [Coaxingly.] Never mind that now----

GEERT. I've got enough in my head now. If you intend to reproach
me?--I shall----

KNEIR. You shall----

GEERT. Pack my bundle!----

KNEIR. And this is his home-coming!

GEERT. Do you expect me to sit on the sinner's bench? No, thank you.

KNEIR. [Anxious; almost crying.] The whole village talked about you--I
couldn't go on an errand but----

GEERT. [Curtly.] Let them that talk say it to my face. I'm no thief
or burglar.

KNEIR. No, but you raised your hand against your superior.

GEERT. [Fiercely.] I should have twisted my fingers in his throat.

KNEIR. Boy--boy; you make us all unhappy.

[Begins to sob.]

GEERT. [Stamping.] Treated like a beast, then I get the devil
besides. [Grabs his bundle.] I'm in no mood to stand it. [At the door,
hesitates, throws down his bundle.] Now! [Lower voice.] Don't cry,
Mother--I would rather--Damn it!

JO. Please--Auntie dear----

KNEIR. Your father lies somewhere in the sea. Never would he have
looked at you again--And he also had a great deal to put up with.

GEERT. I'm glad I'm different--not so submissive--It's a great honor
to let them walk over you! I have no fish blood in me--Now then,
is it to go on raining?

KNEIR. [Embracing him.] If you would only repent.

GEERT. [Flaring up.] I'd knock the teeth out of his jaw tomorrow.

KNEIR. How did it happen?

JO. Hey! Yes--tell us all about it. Come, now, sit down peaceably.

GEERT. I've sat long enough, hahaha!--Let me walk to get the hang of
it. [Lighting his pipe again.] Bah!

JO. Stop smoking then, donkey!

GEERT. Now I'll--But for you it would never have happened----

JO. [Laughing.] But for me?--that's a good
one!

GEERT. I warned you against him.

JO. Against who--What are you talking about?

GEERT. That cad--Don't you remember dancing with him at the tavern
van de Rooie?

JO. I?--Danced?----

GEERT. The night before we sailed.

JO. With that cross-eyed quartermaster?--I don't understand a word
of it--was it with him?--And you yourself wanted me to----

GEERT. You can't refuse a superior--On board ship he had stories. I
overheard him tell the skipper that he----

JO. [Angrily.] What?

GEERT. That he--never mind what--He spoke of you as if you were any
sailor's girl.

JO. I!--The low down----

GEERT. When he came into the hold after the dog watch, I hammered
him on the jaw with a marlin spike. Five minutes later I sat in
irons. Kept in them six days--[Sarcastically.] the provost was full;
then two weeks provost; six months solitary; and suspended from the
navy for ten years; that, damn me, is the most--I'd chop off my two
hands to get back in; to be nigger-driven again; cursed as a beggar
again; ruled as a slave again----

KNEIR. Geert--Geert--Don't speak such words. In the Bible it stands
written----

GEERT. [Grimly.] Stands written--If there was only something written
for us----

KNEIR. Shame on you----

JO. Well, wasn't he in the right?

KNEIR. If he had gone politely to the Commander----

GEERT. Hahaha! You should have been a sailor,
Mother--Hahaha! Politely? They were too glad of the chance to clip and
shear me. While I was in the provost they found newspapers in my bag I
was not allowed to read--and pamphlets I was not allowed to read--that
shut the door--otherwise they would have given me only third class----

KNEIR. Newspapers you were not allowed to read? Then why did you
read them?

GEERT. Why--simple soul--Ach!--when I look at your submissive face I
see no way to tell why--Why do men desert?--Why, ten days before this
happened to me, did Peter the stoker cut off his two fingers?--Just
for a joke? No, on purpose! I can't blame you people--you knew no
better--and I admired the uniform--But now that I've got some brains
I would like to warn every boy that binds himself for fourteen years
to murder.

KNEIR. To murder? Boy, don't say such dreadful things--you are
excited----

GEERT. Excited? No--not at all--worn out, in fact--in Atjeh I fought
with the rest--stuck my bayonet into the body of a poor devil till the
blood spurted into my eyes--For that they gave me the Atjeh medal. I
have it still in my bundle. Hand it here. [Jo picks up the bundle;
Barend looks on.] Where is the thing? [Jerks the medal from his
jacket, throws it out of the window.] Away! you have dangled on my
breast long enough!

KNEIR. Geert! Geert! Who has made you like this! I no longer know
you----

GEERT. Who--who took an innocent boy, that couldn't count ten, and
kidnaped him for fourteen years? Who drilled and trained him for a
dog's life? Who put him in irons when he defended his girl? Irons--you
should have seen me walking in them, groaning like an animal. Near me
walked another animal with irons on his leg, because of an insolent
word to an officer of the watch. Six days with the damned irons on
your claws and no power to break them. Six days lower than a beast.

JO. Don't talk about it any more, you are still so tired----

GEERT. [Wrapped in the grimness of his story.] Then the provost,
that stinking, dark cage; your pig stye is a palace to it. A cage
with no windows--no air--a cage where you can't stand or lie down. A
cage where your bread and water is flung to you with a "there, dog,
eat!" There was a big storm in those days,--two sloops were battered to
pieces;--when you expected to go to the bottom any moment. Never again
to see anyone belongin' to me--neither you--nor you--nor you. To go
down in that dark, stinking hole with no one to talk to--no comrade's
hand!--No, no, let me talk--it lightens my chest! Another drop. [Drinks
quickly.] From the provost to the court martial. A fellow has lots to
bring in there. Your mouth shut. Sit up; mouth shut some more. Gold
epaulettes sitting in judgment on the trash God has kicked into the
world to serve, to salute, to----

KNEIR. Boy--boy----

GEERT. Six months--six months in a cell for reformation. To be reformed
by eating food you could not swallow;--rye bread, barley, pea soup,
rats! Three months I pasted paper bags, and when I saw the chance I
ate the sour paste from hunger. Three months I sorted peas; you'll
not believe it, but may I never look on the sea again if I lie. At
night, over my gas light, I would cook the peas I could nip in my
slop pail. When the handle became too hot to hold any longer, I ate
them half boiled--to fill my stomach. That's to reform you--reform
you--for losing your temper and licking a blackguard that called your
girl a vile name, and reading newspapers you were not allowed to read.

KNEIR. [Anxiously.] That was unjust.

GEERT. Unjust! How dare you say it! Fresh from the sea--in a cell--no
wind and no water, and no air--one small high window with grating like
a partridge cage. The foul smell and the nights--the damned nights,
when you couldn't sleep. When you sprang up and walked, like an insane
man, back and forth--back and forth--four measured paces. The nights
when you sat and prayed not to go insane--and cursed everything,
everything, everything! [Drops his head upon his hands.]

JO. [After a long pause goes to him and throws her arms about his
neck. Kneirtje weeps, Barend stands dazed.] Geert!

GEERT. Now! Don't let us--[Forcibly controlling his tears.] A
light! [Smokes.] Now, Mother! [Goes to the window--says to Barend.] Lay
out the good things--[Draws up the curtain.] I'll be damned! if the
rooster isn't sitting on the roof again, ha, ha, ha! will you believe
it? I would like to sail at once--two days on the Sea! the Sea! the
Sea!--and I'm my old self again. What?--Why is Truus crying as she
walks by? Truus! [Calling.]

KNEIR. Ssst!--Don't call after her. The Anna has just come in without
her husband. [A few sad-looking, low-speaking women walk past the
window.] Poor thing! Six children----

GEERT. Is Ari--[She nods.] That's damned sad! [Drops the window
curtain, stands in somber thought.]


                                CURTAIN.








ACT II.


[Same Room. Time--Early Afternoon.]

JO. [By the table.] Hey!

MARIETJE. [Entering.] They haven't come yet?

SIMON. No, they haven't come yet. [Starting to go.]

JO. Are you running away again?

SIMON. That is to say----

MARIETJE. Good gracious, father, do stay awhile.

SIMON. Yes--I won't go far--I must----

MARIETJE. You must nothing----

SIMON. Well, Salamander, am I a child? I must--I must----[Abruptly
off.]

MARIETJE. Stop it if you can. It begins early in the morning.

JO. Is he bad again?

MARIETJE. You should have seen him day before yesterday--half the
village at his heels. Ach! Ach! When Mother was living he didn't
dare. She used to slap his face for him when he smelled of gin--just
let me try it.

JO. [Bursting into a laugh.] You say that as though--ha ha ha! Mees
ought to hear that.

MARIETJE. I never have seen Mees drinking--and father very seldom
formerly. Ah well--I can't put a cork in his mouth, nor lead him
around by a rope. [Looks through the window.] Gone, of course--to
the Rooie. Horrid old drunkard. How old is Kneirtje today?

JO. Sixty-one. Young for her years, isn't she, eh? Sit down and tell me
[Merrily.] when are you going to be married?

MARIETJE. That depends on the length of the voyage. You know we would
like to marry at once [Smiles, hesitates.] because--because----Well,
you understand. But Mees had to send for his papers first--that takes
two weeks--by that time he is far out at sea; now five weeks--five
little weeks will pass quickly enough.

JO. [Joyfully confidential.] We shall be married in December.

MARIETJE. That's about the same----Are you two!----Now?----I told
you everything----

[Jo shrugs her shoulders and laughs.]

KNEIR. [Entering.] Laughing as usual.

MARIETJE. [Kissing her.] May you live to be a hundred----

KNEIR. God forbid!--a hundred years. I haven't the money for
that! [Opening a bag.] You may try one--you, too--gingerbread nuts--no,
not two, you, with the grab-all fingers! For each of the boys a
half pound gingerbread nuts--and a half pound chewing tobacco--and
a package of cigars. Do you know what I'm going to give Barend since
he has become so brave--look----

JO. Now--you should give those to Geert----

KNEIR. No, I'm so pleased with the lad that he has made up his mind
I want to reward him.

MARIETJE. Did you buy them?

KNEIR. No, indeed! These are ever so old, they are earrings. My
husband wore them Sundays, when he was at home.

MARIETJE. There are little ships on them--masts--and sails--I wish
I had them for a brooch.

JO. Why give them to that coward? That's not right.

MARIETJE. You had a time getting him to sign--Eh!

KNEIR. Yes--yes. But he was willing to go with his brother--and
now take it home to yourself--a boy that is not strong--not very
strong--rejected for the army, and a boy who heard a lot about his
father and Josef.

JO. I just can't stand that! First you curse and scold at him, and
now nothing is too good.

KNEIR. Even so, no matter what has been. In an hour he will be gone,
and you must never part in anger. Have a sweet dram, Marietje. We
have fresh wafers and ginger cakes all laid in for my birthday--set it
all ready, Jo. Saart is coming soon, and the boys may take a dram, too.

COBUS. [Through the window. Daantje with him.]

    A sweet young Miss
    And a glass of Anis--
    I shall surely come in for this.

KNEIR. Throw your chew away before you come in.

COB. Indeed I'll not! [Hides it in his red handkerchief.] No--now--you
know what I want to say.

DAAN. Same here. Same here.

JO. I don't need to ask if----[Pours the dram.]

COB. No--no--go ahead--just a little more.

JO. There!--now it is running over.

COB. No matter, I shan't spill a drop. [Bends trembling to the
table. Lips to the glass, sucks up the liquor.] He, he, he!

DAAN. Ginger cake? If you please. [Yawns.]

MARIETJE. [Imitating his yawn.] Ah! Thanks!

DAAN. When you have my years!--Hardly slept a wink last night--and
no nap this afternoon.

JO. Creep into the bedstead.

COB. That's what he would like to do----

MARIETJE. Better take a hot bottle, Daan!

COB. Now, if I had my choice----

KNEIR. Hold your tongue--Story teller! The Matron at the Home has to
help dress him. And yet he----

JO. Ha, ha, ha! Oh, Uncle Cobus!

MARIETJE. Oh! Oh! Hahaha!

COB. Tja! the Englishman says: "The old man misses the kisses, and
the young man kisses the misses." Do you know what that means?

JO. Yes, that means, "Woman, take your cat inside, its beginning to
rain." Hahaha! Hahaha!

SAART. [Through door at left.] Good day! Congratulations everybody!

COB. Come in.

SAART. Good day, Daantje; day, Cobus; and day, Marietje; and day,
Jo. No, I'll not sit down.

KNEIR. A dram----

SAART. No, I'll not sit down. My kettle is on the fire.

JO. Come now!

SAART. No, I'm not going to do it--my door is ajar--and the cat may
tip over the oil stove. No, just give it to me this way--so--so--many
happy returns, and may your boys--Where are the boys?

KNEIR. Geert has gone to say good bye, and Barend has gone with Mees
to take the mattresses and chests in the yawl. They'll soon be here,
for they must be on board by three o'clock.

SAART. Hey, this burns my heart out. [Refers to the anisette.] Were
you at Leen's yesterday?

KNEIR. No, couldn't go.

SAART. There was a lot of everything and more too. The bride was
full,--three glasses "roses without thorns," two of "perfect love,"
and surely four glasses of "love in a mist." Well! Where she stowed
it all I don't know.

COB. Give me the old fashioned dram, brandy and syrup--eh! Daantje?

DAANTJE. [Startled.] What?

KNEIR. He's come here to sleep--you look as if you hadn't been to
bed at all.

COB. In his bed--he, he, he!

DAAN. [Crossly.] Come, no jokes.

COB. Hehehe! [Takes out his handkerchief.]

KNEIR. No, I say, don't take out your chew.

SAART. Old snooper!

COB. Snooper? No, you'd never guess how I got it. Less than ten
minutes ago I met Bos the ship-owner, and he gave me--he gave me a
little white roll--of--of tissue paper with tobacco inside. What do
you call the things?

MARIETJE. Cigarettes.

COB. Yes, catch me smoking a thing like that in--in paper--that's a
chew with a shirt on.

SAART. And you're a crosspatch without a shirt. No, I'm not going to
sit down.

JO. It's already poured out.

SIMON. [Drunk.] Day.

KNEIR. Day, Simon--shove in, room for you here.

SIMON. [Plumps down by door at left.] I'll sit here.

COB. Have a sweet dram?

MARIETJE. No.

SIMON. [Huskily.] Why no?

MARIETJE. You've had enough.

SIMON. Have I? Salamanders!

MARIETJE. No, I won't have it.

KNEIR. Did you see Geert?

SIMON. [Muttering.] Wh--wh--Geert!

COB. Give him just one, for a parting cup.

MARIETJE. [Angrily.] No! No!

SIMON. [Thickly.] No? I'll be damned! [Lights a nose warmer.]

KNEIR. Is there much work in the dry dock, Simon?

SIMON. That stands fast.

SAART. Well--I'm going.

JO. Hey! How unsociable! They'll soon be here. Come sit down----

SAART. No, if I sit down I stay too long. Well then, half a
glass--no--no cookies.

GEERT. [Through door at left.] It looks like all hands on deck
here! Good day, everybody! [Pointing to Simon.] Lazarus! Eh, Simon?

SIMON. [Muttering.] Uh--ja----

MARIETJE. Let him alone.

GEERT. The deuce, but you're touchy! We've got a quarter of an hour,
boys! Pour out the drinks, Jo. [Sits between Kneir. and Jo.] Here's
to you, Mother! Prost! Santy, Jo! Santy, Daantje! Santys!

JO. Hahaha! Fallen asleep with a ginger nut in his hand.

KNEIR. Isn't he well?

COB. No. Sick in the night--afraid to call the matron; walked about
in his bare feet; got chilled.

GEERT. Afraid of the Matron! Are you eating charity bread?

COB. It's easy for you to talk, but if you disturb her, she keeps
you in for two weeks.

GEERT. Poor devils--I don't want to live to be so old.

JO. Oh, real sweet of you. We're not even married
yet--and he's a widower already!

GEERT. [Gaily.] There's many a slip! Hahaha! Shall I give him a
poke? I don't need a belaying pin----[Sings.]

    "Sailing, sailing, don't wait to be called;
    Starboard watch, spring from your bunk;
    Let the man at the wheel go to his rest;
    The rain is good and the wind is down.
    It's sailing, it's sailing,
    It's sailing for the starboard watch."

[The others join him in beating time on the table with their fists.]

Hahaha! [General laugh.]

DAAN. [Awakes with a start.] You'll do the same when you're as old
as I am.

GEERT. Hahaha! I'll never be old. Leaky ships must sink.

JO. Now, Geert.

SAART. Never be old! You might have said that a while back when you
looked like a wet dish rag. But now! Prison life agreed with you, boy!

COB. Hehehe! Now we can make up a song about you, pasting paper
bags--just as Domela--he he he! [Sings in a piping voice.]

    My nevvy Geert pastes paper bags,
    Hi-ha, ho!
    My nevvy Geert----

SAART. Pastes paper bags.

DAAN., JO., MARIETJE AND COBUS. Hi--ha--ho!

GEERT. [Laughing.] Go to thunder! You're making a joke of it!

KNEIR. [Anxiously.] Please don't be so noisy. It isn't best.

JO. Oh! I expected that! This is your birthday, see! Do take a chair,
Saart.

SAART. Chair. I'm blest if I see----

MARIETJE. I don't mind standing.

SAART. No--there's room here. [Squeezes in beside Cobus.]

COB. I'll be falling off here!

MARIETJE. [Standing beside her dazed father.] Father!

SIMON. [Muttering.] They must--they must--not--not--that's fast.

MARIETJE. Come, now!

GEERT. Let the man sail his own mast overboard! He isn't in the way.

SIMON. [With dazed gesture.] You must--you must----

MARIETJE. [Crossly.] What's the matter now?

SIMON. [Mumbling.] The ribs--and--and----[Firmly.] That's fast!----

GEERT, JO., COBUS, DAANTJE AND SAART. Ha, ha, ha! Ha, ha, ha!

MEES. [Enters.] Salute!

KNEIR. [Anxiously.] Are you alone? Where's Barend?

MEES. I don't know.

KNEIR. You went together to take the mattresses and chests----

MEES. Row with the skipper! He's no sailor!

JO. A row? Has the trouble begun already?

MEES. Can't repeat a word of it--afraid--afraid--always afraid----[To
Marietje, who has induced her father to rise.] Are you coming along?

JO. No, take a dram before you go. It's Aunt's birthday.

MEES. You don't say! Now--now--Kneir, many happy returns.

KNEIR. You have made me anxious.

JO. [Laughing.] Anxious!

KNEIR. Yes, anxious! She's surprised at that. I've taken an advance
from Bos.

GEERT. He's signed, hasn't he? Don't worry, Mother!

COB. Perhaps he's saying good-bye to his girl. [Sound of Jelle's
fiddle outside.] Ta, de, da!

SAART. Do sit still--one would think you'd eaten horse flesh.

DAAN. They give us meat? Not even a dead cat!

JELLE. [Playing the old polka.] If you please!

GEERT. Come on in, old man!

JO. Poor old fellow, gets blinder every day.

JELLE. [Playing.] I come regular once a week.

GEERT. Another tune first, Old Man! Not that damned old polka.

JO. Yes, play that tune of--of--what do you call 'em?

COB. Yes, the one she mentions is fine.

SAART. You know, Jelle, the one--that one that goes [Sings.] "I know
a song that charms the heart."

MEES. Say! Give us----[Jelle begins the Marseillaise.] That's better
fare. [Sings.] "Alloose--vodela--bedeije--deboe--debie--de boolebie."

MARIETJE. Hahaha! That's the French of a dead codfish!

JO. Hahaha!

MEES. Laugh all you please! I've laid in a French port--and say, it
was first rate! When I said pain they gave me bread--and when I said
"open the port," they opened the door. Great!

GEERT. All Gammon! Begin again, Jelle. Why the devil! Let's use the
Dutch words we've got for it.

[Jelle begins again. Geert roars.]

    "Arise men, brothers, all united!
    Arise burgers, come join with us!
    Your wrongs, your sorrows be avenged"--

BOS. [Who has stood at the open window listening during the singing,
yells angrily.] What's going on here? [Scared hush over all.] Damn
it! It's high time you were all on board! [Goes off furious.]

KNEIR. [After a long pause.] Oh--Oh--how he scared me--he! he!

JO. What's the matter with him?

MEES. I couldn't think where the voice came from.

SAART. How stupid of you to roar like a weaned pig, when you know
Meneer Bos lives only two doors away.

MARIETJE. Lord, wasn't he mad.

COB. Hehehe! You'll never eat a sack of salt with him.

KNEIR. What business had you to sing those low songs, anyway?

GEERT. Well, I'll be damned! Am I in my own house or not? If he
hadn't taken me by surprise! An old frog like that before your eyes
of a sudden. I'd cleaned out his cupboard! Play on, Jelle!

[Jelle begins again.]

KNEIR. Ach, please don't, Geert. I'm afraid that if Meneer
Bos----[Motions to Jelle to stop.]

GEERT. This one is afraid to sail, this one of the Matron of the Old
Men's Home, this one of a little ship owner! Forbids me in my own
house! Commands me as though I were a servant!

SAART. Fun is fun, but if you were a ship owner, you wouldn't want
your sailors singing like socialists either.

KNEIR. When he knows how dependent I am, too.

GEERT. [Passionately.] Dependent! Don't be dependent! Is it an
honor to do his cleaning! Why not pay for the privilege! Thank him
for letting you scrub! Dependent! For mopping the office floor and
licking his muddy boots you get fifty cents twice a week and the
scraps off their plates.

JO. Don't get so angry, foolish boy!

KNEIR. Oh, what a row I'll get Saturday!

GEERT. A row, you? Why should he row with you? If you hadn't all your
life allowed this braggart who began with nothing to walk over you
and treat you as a slave, while father and my brothers lost their
lives on the sea making money for him, you'd give him a scolding and
damn his hide for his insolence in opening his jaw.

KNEIR. I--I--God forbid.

GEERT. God forbids you to bend your neck. Here--take it--Jelle. Next
year Mother will give you pennies to play. "Arise men, brothers,
all unite-e-ed"----

KNEIR. Please, Geert, please don't. [Lays her hand on his mouth.]

JO. Hey! Stop tormenting your old mother on her birthday. [Jelle
holds out his hand.] Here, you can't stand on one leg.

COB. Do you want money from me? It's all in the bank. [Pointing to
Daan.] He's the man to go to.

DAAN. [Crossly, drinking.] Peh! Don't make a fool of me.

JELLE. Well, thanks to you both. [Off.]

MEES. Will you come along now?

GEERT. I'll wait a few minutes for Barend. What's your hurry? The
boys will come by here any way.

SAART. Don't you catch on that those two are--A good voyage.

MEES AND MARIETJE. [Shaking hands.] Good voyage!

KNEIR. Half past two--I'm uneasy.

SAART. Half past two? Have I staid so long--and my door ajar! Good
voyage. Good day, Kneir. [Off.]

BOS. [Brusquely coming through the kitchen door.] Are you also planning
to stay behind?

GEERT. [Gruffly.] Are you speaking to me?

BOS. [Angrily.] Yes, to you. Skipper Hengst has my orders. Understand?

GEERT. [Calmly to the others.] Gone crazy----

BOS. [More angry.] The police have been notified.

GEERT. [With forced calm.] You and the police make me tired. [Cobus
and Daantje slink away, stopping outside to listen at the window.] Are
you out of your head? Who said I wasn't going?

KNEIR. Yes, Meneer, he is all ready to go.

BOS. That other boy of yours that Hengst engaged--refuses to go.

KNEIR. Oh, good God!

BOS. [To Cobus and Daan.] Why are you listening? [They bow in a
scared way and hastily go on.] This looks like a dive--drunkenness
and rioting.

JO. [Excusing.] It's Aunt's birthday.

GEERT. [Angrily.] Mother's birthday or not, we do as we please here.

BOS. You change your tone or----

GEERT. My tone? You get out!

KNEIR. [Anxious.] Ach--dear Geert--Don't take offense, Meneer--he's
quick tempered, and in anger one says----

BOS. Things he's no right to say. Dirt is all the thanks you get for
being good to you people. [Threatening.] If you're not on board in
ten minutes, I'll send the police for you!

GEERT. You send--what do you take me for, any way!

BOS. What I take him for--he asks that--dares to ask----[To
Kneirtje.] You'll come to me again recommending a trouble-maker kicked
out by the Navy.

GEERT. [Mocking.] Did you recommend? Hahaha! You make me laugh! You
pay wages and I do the work. For the rest you can go to hell.

BOS. You're just a big overgrown boy, that's all!

GEERT. [Threatening.] If it wasn't for Mother--I'd----

KNEIR. [Throwing her arms about him.] Geert! Geert! [A long pause.]

BOS. And this in your house! Good day. [At the door.] Kneir, Kneir,
consider well what you do--I gave you an advance in good faith----

KNEIR. Ach, yes, Meneer--Ach, yes----

BOS. Haven't I always treated you well?

KNEIR. Yes, Meneer--you and the priest----

BOS. One of your sons refuses to go, the other--you'll come to a bad
end, my little friend.

GEERT. Haul in your fore sheet! On board I'm a sailor--I'm the skipper
here. Such a topsy turvy! A ship owner layin' down the law; don't do
this and don't do that! Boring his nose through the window when you
don't sing to suit him.

BOS. For my part, sing, but a sensible sailor expecting to marry ought
to appreciate it when his employer is looking out for his good. Your
father was a thorough good man. Did he ever threaten his employer? You
young fellows have no respect for grey hairs.

GEERT. Respect for grey hairs? By thunder, yes! for grey hairs that
have become grey in want and misery----

BOS. [Shrugging his shoulders.] Your mother's seen me, as child,
standing before the bait trays. I also have stood in an East wind
that froze your ears, biting off bait heads----

GEERT. That'll do. We don't care for your stories, Meneer. You have
become a rich man, and a tyrant. Good!--you are perhaps no worse than
the rest, but don't interfere with me in my own house. My father was
a different sort. We may all become different, and perhaps my son may
live to see the day when he will come, as I did, twelve years ago,
crying to the office, to ask if there's any news of his father and
his two brothers! and not find their employer sitting by his warm fire
and his strong box, drinking grog. He may not be damned for coming so
often to ask the same thing, nor be turned from the door with snubs
and the message, "When there's anything to tell you'll hear of it."

BOS. [Roughly.] You lie--I never did anything of the sort.

GEERT. I won't soil any more words over it. Only to let you know I
remember. My father's hair was grey, my mother's hair is grey, Jelle,
the poor devil who can't find a place in the Old Men's Home because
on one occasion in his life he was light-fingered--Jelle has also
grey hairs.

BOS. Fine! Reasoning without head or tail. If you hear him or crooked
Jacob, it's the same cuckoo song. [To Kneir.] It's come out, eh? But
now I'll give another word of advice, my friend, before you go under
sail. You have an old mother, you expect to marry, good; you've been
in prison six months--I won't talk of that; you have barked out your
insolence to me in your own house, but if you attempt any of this
talk on board the Hope you'll find out there is a muster roll.

GEERT. Every year old child knows that.

BOS. When you've become older--and wiser--you'll be ashamed of your
insolence--"the ship owner by his warm stove, and his grog"----

GEERT. And his strong box----

BOS. [Hotly.] And his cares, you haven't the wits to understand! Who
feeds you all?

GEERT. [Forced calmness.] Who hauls the fish out of the sea? Who
risks his life every hour of the day? Who doesn't take off his
clothes in five or six weeks? Who walks with hands covered with salt
sores,--without water to wash face or hands? Who sleep like beasts
two in a bunk? Who leave wives and mothers behind to beg alms? Twelve
head of us are presently going to sea--we get twenty-five per cent
of the catch, you seventy-five. We do the work, you sit safely at
home. Your ship is insured, and we--we can go to the bottom in case
of accident--we are not worth insuring----

KNEIR. [Soothing.] Geert! Geert! Geert!

BOS. That's an entertaining lad! You should be a clown in a
circus! Twenty-seven per cent isn't enough for him----

GEERT. I'll never eat salted codfish from your generosity! Our whole
share is in "profit and loss." When luck is with us we each make eight
guilders a week, one guilder a day when we're lucky. One guilder a
day at sea, to prepare salt fish, cod with livers for the people in
the cities--hahaha!--a guilder a day--when you're lucky and don't go
to the bottom. You fellows know what you're about when you engage us
on shares.

[Old and young heads of fishermen appear at the window.]

A VOICE. Are you coming? [Bos is politely greeted.]

GEERT. I shall soon follow you.

BOS. Good voyage, men! And say to the skipper--no, never mind--I'll
be there myself----[A pause.] Twenty-five minutes past two. Now I'll
take two minutes more, blockhead, to rub under your nose something
I tried three times to say, but you gave me no chance to get in a
word. When you lie in your bunk tonight--as a beast, of course!--try
and think of my risks, by a poor catch--lost nets and cordage--by
damages and lightning in the mast, by running aground, and God knows
what else. The Jacoba's just had her hatches torn off, the Queen
Wilhelmina half her bulwarks washed away. You don't count that,
for you don't have to pay for it! Three months ago the Expectation
collided with a steamer. Without a thought of the catch or the nets,
the men sprang overboard, leaving the ship to drift! Who thought of
my interests? You laugh, boy, because you don't realize what cares I
have. On the Mathilde last week the men smuggled gin and tobacco in
their mattresses to sell to the English. Now the ship lies chained. Do
you pay the fine?

GEERT. Pluck feathers off a frog's back. Hahaha!

BOS. If you were talking about conditions in Middelharnis or Pernis,
you'd have reason for it. My men don't pay the harbor costs, don't
pay for bait, towing, provisions, barrels, salt. I don't expect you
to pay the loss of the cordage, if a gaff or a boom breaks. I go into
my own pocket for it. I gave your mother an advance, your brother
Barend deserts.

KNEIR. No, Meneer, I can't believe that.

BOS. Hengst telephoned me from the harbor, else I wouldn't have
been here to be insulted by your oldest son, who's disturbing the
whole neighborhood roaring his scandalous songs! I'm going to the
ship! [Angrily.] If you're not on board on time I'll apply "Article
Sixteen" and fine you twenty-five guilders.

GEERT. Yes, why not? I can stand it!

BOS. [Turning to Kneir.] As for you, my wife doesn't need you at
present, you're all a bad lot here.

KNEIR. [Anxiously.] Ach, Meneer, it isn't my fault!

GEERT. Must you punish the old woman too?

BOS. Blame your own sons for that! After this voyage you can look for
another employer, who enjoys throwing pearls before swine better than
I do!

GEERT. And now, get out! Get out! [Pushes the door shut after Bos.]

KNEIR. What a birthday! What a birthday!

JO. Don't hang your head so soon, Aunt! Geert was in the right----

KNEIR. In the right! What good does that do?

GEERT. You're not running after him?

KNEIR. No, to look for Barend. Great God, if he should desert--if he
deserts--he also goes to prison--two sons who----

GEERT. Aren't you going to wish me a good voyage--or don't you think
that necessary?

KNEIR. My head is queer. I'm coming to the harbor. Yes, I'm coming----

JO. I'm sorry for her, the poor thing.

GEERT. He's a hound, that fellow!

JO. Where's your sou'wester? Hope it isn't mislaid. You gave him a
talking to, didn't you? It was drunken Simon that set him going. Now
don't look so solemn. Here it is. [Picks a geranium from a flower
pot.] There! And you keep it on, so. [On his knee.] And you will
think of me every night, will you? Will you? [Springing up.] What,
are you back so soon?

KNEIR. [Enters.] Isn't he in here?

GEERT. He's in the pocket of my jacket! Hahaha!

KNEIR. Truus saw him hanging around the house. Ach! Ach! Ach!

GEERT. We're going! Come along with us. If that coward refuses to go,
your sitting at home won't help a damn.

KNEIR. No, no, no.

JO. Follow after us, then!

KNEIR. [Anxiously.] Yes, yes, yes! Don't forget your chewing tobacco
and your cigars----

GEERT. [Gaily.] If you're too late--I'll never look at you again!

[Exeunt Geert and Jo.]

BAR. [Entering quickly from left.] S-s-s-st!

KNEIR. You miserable bad boy!

BAR. S-ssst!

KNEIR. What sssst! I'll shout the whole village together if you don't
immediately run and follow Geert and Jo.

BAR. [Panting.] If you can keep Geert from going--call him back!

KNEIR. Have you gone crazy with fear, you big coward?

BAR. [Panting.] The Good Hope is no good, no good--her ribs are
rotten--the planking is rotten!----

KNEIR. Don't stand there telling stories to excuse yourself. After
half past two! March!----

BAR. [Almost crying.] If you don't believe me!

KNEIR. I won't listen. March! or I'll slap your face.

BAR. Strike me then! Strike me then! Ah, God! keep Geert from
going! Simon the ship carpenter warned me.

KNEIR. Simon, the ship carpenter--that drunken sot who can't speak
two words. You are a disgusting bad boy. First you sign, then you
run away! Get up!

BAR. Me--you may beat me to death!--but I won't go on an unseaworthy
ship!

KNEIR. What do you know about it? Hasn't the ship been lying in the
dry docks?

BAR. There was no caulking her any more--Simon----

KNEIR. Shut your mouth with your Simon! March, take your package of
chewing tobacco.

BAR. [Yelling.] I'm not going--I'm not going. You don't know--you
didn't see it! The last voyage she had a foot of water in her hold!

KNEIR. The last voyage? A ship that has just returned from her fourth
voyage to the herring catch and that has brought fourteen loads! Has
it suddenly become unseaworthy, because you, you miserable coward,
are going along?

BAR. [With feverish anxiety.] I looked in the hold--the barrels were
floating. You can see death that is hiding down there.

KNEIR. Bilge water, as in every ship! The barrels floating! Tell that
to your grandmother, not to an old sailor's wife. Skipper Hengst
is a child, eh! Isn't Hengst going and Mees and Gerrit and Jacob
and Nellis--your own brother and Truus' little Peter? Do you claim
to know more than old seamen? [Fiercely.] Get up! I'm not going to
stand it to see you taken aboard by the police----

BAR. [Crying.] Oh, Mother dear, Mother dear, don't make me go!

KNEIR. Oh, God; how you have punished me in my children--my children
are driving me to beggary. I've taken an advance--Bos has refused to
give me any more cleaning to do--and--and----[Firmly.] Well, then,
let them come for you--you'd better be taken than run away. Oh, oh,
that this should happen in my family----

BAR. [Running to the cooking shed.]

KNEIR. [Barring the way.] You'll not get out----

BAR. Let me pass, Mother. I don't know what I'm doing--I might hurt----

KNEIR. Now he is brave, against his sixty year old mother----Raise
your hand if you dare!

BAR. [Falls on a chair shaking his head between his hands.] Oh, oh,
oh--If they take me aboard, you'll never see me again--you'll never
see Geert again----

KNEIR. The ship is in God's hands. It's tempting God to rave this
way with fear----[Friendlier tone.] Come, a man of your age must
not cry like a child--come! I wanted to surprise you with Father's
earrings--come!

BAR. Mother dear--I don't dare--I don't dare--I shall drown--hide
me--hide me----

KNEIR. Have you gone insane, boy! If I believed a word of your talk,
would I let Geert go? [Puts a package in his pocket.] There's a
package of tobacco, and one of cigars. Now sit still, and I'll put
in your earrings--look--[Talking as to a child.]--real silver--ships
on them with sails--sit still, now--there's one--there's two--walk
to the looking glass----

BAR. [Crying.] No--no!----

KNEIR. Come now, you're making me weak for nothing--please,
dear boy--I do love you and your brother--you're all I have on
earth. Come now! Every night I will pray to the good God to bring you
home safely. You must get used to it, then you will become a brave
seaman--and--and----[Cries.] Come now, Barend, Barend! [Holds the
mirror before him.] Look at your earrings--what?----

1ST POLICEMAN. [Coming in through door at left, good-natured
manner.] Skipper Hengst has requested the Police----If you please,
my little man, we have no time to lose.

BAR. [Screaming.] I won't go! I won't go! The ship--is rotten----

2ND POLICEMAN. [Smiling good naturedly.] Then you should not have
mustered in. Must we use force? Come now, little man. [Taps him kindly
on the shoulder.]

BAR. Don't touch me! Don't touch me! [Clings desperately to the
bedstead and door jamb.]

2ND POLICEMAN. Must we put on the handcuffs, boy?

BAR. [Moaning.] Help me, Mother! You'll never see me again! I shall
drown in the dirty, stinking sea!

1ST POLICEMAN. [Crossly.] Come, come! Let go of the door jamb! [Seizes
his wrists.]

BAR. [Clinging harder.] No! [Shrieking.] Cut off my hands! Oh God, Oh
God, Oh God! [Crawls up against the wall, beside himself with terror.]

KNEIR. [Almost crying.] The boy is afraid----

1ST POLICEMAN. Then you tell him to let go!

KNEIR. [Sobbing as she seizes Barend's hands.] Come now, boy--come
now--God will not forsake you----

BAR. [Moaning as he loosens his hold, sobs despairingly.] You'll
never see me again, never again----

1ST POLICEMAN. Forward, march!

[They exeunt, dragging Barend.]

KNEIR. Oh, oh----

TRUUS. [With anxious curiosity, at side door.] What was the matter,
Kneir?

KNEIR. [Sobbing.] Barend had to be taken by the police. Oh, and now
I'm ashamed to go walk through the village, to tell them good bye--the
disgrace--the disgrace----

                                CURTAIN.








ACT III.


[Scene: Same as before. Evening. A lighted lamp--the illuminated
chimney gives a red glow. A rushing wind howls about the house. Jo
and Kneirtje discovered. Kneirtje lying on bed, dressed, Jo reading
to her from prayerbook.]

JO. And this verse is mighty fine. Are you listening? [Reads.]

    "Mother Mary! in piteousness,
      To your poor children of the sea,
    Reach down your arms in their distress;
      With God their intercessor be.
    Unto the Heart Divine your prayer
    Will make an end to all their care."

[Staring into the bed.] Are you asleep? Aunt! Are you asleep? [A
knock--she tiptoes to cook-shed door, puts her finger to her lips in
warning to Clementine and Kaps, who enter.] Softly, Miss.

CLEMENTINE. [To Kaps.] Shut the door. What a tempest! My eyes are
full of sand. [To Jo.] Is Kneir in bed?

JO. She's lying down awhile in her clothes. She's not herself yet,
feverish and coughing.

CLEMENTINE. I've brought her a plate of soup, and a half dozen
eggs. Now then, Kaps! Kaps!

KAPS. Yes?

CLEMENTINE. On the table. What a bore! Deaf as a post! What were
you reading?

JO. The "Illustrated Catholic."

CLEMENTINE. Where did you put the eggs?

KAPS. I understand.

KNEIRTJE. [From the bedstead.] Is anyone there?

CLEMENTINE. It's me, Clementine.

KNEIRTJE. [Rising.] Hasn't the wind gone down yet?

CLEMENTINE. I've brought you some veal soup, Kneir. It's
delicious. Well, Almighty! You've spilled it all over.

KAPS. I'd like to see you carry a full pan with the sand blowing in
your eyes.

CLEMENTINE. Well, its mighty queer. There was twice as much meat in it.

KAPS. What? Can't hear, with the wind.

KNEIRTJE. Thank you kindly, Miss.

CLEMENTINE. [Counting the eggs.] One, two, three, four! The others?

KAPS. There's five--and--[Looking at his hand, which drips with egg
yolk.]--and----

CLEMENTINE. Broken, of course!

KAPS. [Bringing out his handkerchief and purse covered with egg.] I
put them away so carefully. What destruction! What a muss!

JO. [Laughing.] Make an omelet of it.

KAPS. That's because you pushed against me. Just look at my keys.

CLEMENTINE. [Laughing.] He calls that putting them away
carefully. You'd better go home.

KAPS. [Peevishly.] No, that's not true.

CLEMENTINE. [Louder.] You may go! I can find the way back alone!

KAPS. My purse, my handkerchief, my cork screw. [Crossly.] Good
night. [Off.]

CLEMENTINE. I don't know why Father keeps that bookkeeper, deaf,
and cross. Does it taste good?

KNEIRTJE. Yes, Miss. You must thank your mother.

CLEMENTINE. Indeed I'll not. Pa and Ma are obstinate. They haven't
forgotten the row with your sons yet. Mouth shut, or I'll get a
scolding. May Jo go to the beach with me to look at the sea? The
waves have never been so high!

JO. Yes, I'll go, Miss.

KNEIRTJE. No, don't leave me alone. Go on the beach in such a
storm! [Crash outside, she screams.]

JO. What was that?

CLEMENTINE. I heard something break. [Enter Cobus.]

COB. God bless me! That missed me by a hair.

JO. Are you hurt?

COB. I got a tap aft that struck the spot. Lucky my head wasn't
there! The tree beside the pig stye was broken in two like a pipe stem.

KNEIRTJE. Did it come down on the pig stye?

COB. I believe it did.

KNEIRTJE. I'm afraid it's fallen in. The wood is so rotten.

JO. Ach, no! Aunt always expects the worst. [Surprised.] Uncle Cobus,
how do you come to be out, after eight o'clock, in this beastly
weather?

COB. To fetch the doctor for Daan.

CLEMENTINE. Is old Daan sick?

COB. Tja. Old age. Took to his bed suddenly. Can't keep anything on
his stomach. The beans and pork gravy he ate----

CLEMENTINE. Beans and pork gravy for a sick old man?

COB. Tja. The matron broils him a chicken or a beefsteak--Eh? She's
even cross because she's got to beat an egg for his breakfast. This
afternoon he was delirious, talking of setting out the nets, and paying
out the buoy line. I sez to the matron, "His time's come." "Look out or
yours'll come," sez she. I sez, "The doctor should be sent for." "Mind
your own business," sez she, "am I the Matron or are you?" Then I
sez, "You're the matron." "Well then," sez she. Just now, she sez,
"You'd better go for the doctor." As if it couldn't a been done this
afternoon. I go to the doctor and the doctor's out of town. Now I've
been to Simon to take me to town in his dog car.

JO. Is Simon coming here?

CLEMENTINE. If drunken Simon drives, you're likely to roll off
the dyke.

COB. He isn't drunk tonight.

JO. Give him a chalk mark for that. Must the doctor ride in the dog
car? Hahaha!

COB. Why not if he feels like it? Shall I tell you something? Hey,
what a storm! Listen! Listen! The tiles will soon be coming down.

JO. Go on, now, tell us the rest.

COB. What I want to say is, that it's a blessing for Daantje he's
out of his head, 'fraid as he's always been of death. Afraid!

JO. So is everyone else, Cobus.

COB. Every one? That's all in the way you look at it. If my time
should come tomorrow, then, I think, we must all! The waters of the sea
will not wash away that fact. God has given, God has taken away. Now,
don't laugh, think! God takes us and we take the fish. On the fifth
day He created the Sea, great whales and the moving creatures that
abound therein, and said: "Be fruitful," and He blessed them. That
was evening and that was morning, that was the fifth day. And on the
sixth day He created man and said also: "Be fruitful," and blessed
them. That was again evening and again morning, that was the sixth
day. No, now, don't laugh. You must think. When I was on the herring
catch, or on the salting voyage, there were times when I didn't dare
use the cleaning knife. Because when you shove a herring's head
to the left with your thumb, and you lift out the gullet with the
blade, the creature looks at you with such knowing eyes, and yet
you clean two hundred in an hour. And when you cut throats out of
fourteen hundred cod, that makes twenty-eight hundred eyes that look
at you! Look! Just look. Ask me how many fish have I killed? I had few
equals in boning and cutting livers. Tja, tja, and how afraid they all
were! Afraid! They looked up at the clouds as if they were saying:
"How about this now. He blessed us same as He blessed you?" I say:
we take the fish and God takes us. We must all, the beasts must,
and the men must, and because we all must, none of us should--now,
that's just as if you'd pour a full barrel into an empty one. I'd
be afraid to be left alone in the empty barrel, with every one else
in the other barrel. No, being afraid is no good; being afraid is
standing on your toes and looking over the edge.

KNEIRTJE. Is that a way to talk at night? You act as if you'd had
a dram.

COB. A dram? No, not a drop! Is that Simon?

KNEIRTJE. [Listening between the bedsteads.] Am I right about the pig
stye or not? Hear how the poor animal is going on out there. I'm sure
the wall has fallen in.

JO. Let me go then. Don't you go outside!

KNEIRTJE. Ach, don't bother me! [Off.]

JO. You pour yourself out a bowl, Uncle Cobus! I'll give her a
helping hand.

COB. Take care of the lamp chimney.

CLEMENTINE. [At the window.] Oh! Oh! Oh! What a gale! [Returning to
the table.] Cobus, I'll thank God when the Good Hope is safely in.

COB. Tja. No ship is safe tonight. But the Hope is an old ship,
and old ships are the last to go down.

CLEMENTINE. That's what you say.

COB. No, that's what every old sailor says. Have a bowl, Miss?

CLEMENTINE. [After a silence, staring.] All the same, I shall pray
God tonight.

COB. That's real good of you, Miss. But the Jacoba is out and the
Mathilda is out and the Expectation is out. Why should you pray for
one ship?

CLEMENTINE. The Good Hope is rotten--so--so----[Stops anxiously.]

COB. [Drinking coffee.] Who said that?

CLEMENTINE. That's what----Why--that's what----I thought----It just
occurred to me.

COB. No, you are lying now.

CLEMENTINE. Oh, you are polite!

COB. If the Good Hope was rotten, then your father would----

CLEMENTINE. Oh, shut your fool mouth, you'll make Kneir anxious. Quick,
Kneir, shut the door, for the lamp.

KNEIRTJE. [Entering with Jo.] Good thing we looked.

JO. The stye had blown down.

KNEIRTJE. Oh, my poor boys! How scared Barend will be, and just as
they're homeward bound.

JO. Coffee, Mother? Aunt! Funny, isn't it, eh? I keep saying
Mother. You take another cup, Miss. The evening is still so long and
so gloomy--Yes?

[Enter Simon and Marietje, who is crying.]

SIMON. Good evening. Salamanders, what a wind! Stop your damn
howling----

KNEIRTJE. What's the matter?

MARIETJE. When I think of Mees.

KNEIRTJE. Now, now, look at Jo. Her lover is also--be a good seaman's
wife. Foolish girl! Don't be childish. Give her a bowl to cheer her up.

MARIETJE. It's going into the sixth week.

COB. Don't cry before you're hurt! You girls haven't had any trouble
yet! Is the carriage at the door?

SIMON. I'm damned if I like the trip. If it wasn't for Daan----

JO. Here, this will warm you up, Simon.

SIMON. [Drinking.] Curse it, that's hot. It's happened to me before
with the dog car, in a tempest like this. It was for Katrien. She was
expecting every minute. I was upset twice, car and all. And when the
doctor came, Katrien was dead and the child was dead, but if you ask
me, I'd rather sit in my dog car tonight than to be on the sea.

KNEIRTJE. Yes! Yes!

JO. Another bowl?

SIMON. No, don't let us waste our time. Ready, Cobus?

COB. If you'll only be careful! Good night, all! [Both exit.]

JO. Jesus! Don't sit around so solemn! Let's talk, then we won't
think of anything.

MARIETJE. Last night was stormy, too, and I had such a bad dream. It
was so awful.

CLEMENTINE. Foolish girl! Dreams are not real.

MARIETJE. I can't rightly say it was a dream. There was a rap on the
window, once. I lay still. Again a rap, then I got up. Nothing to be
seen. Nothing. Soon as I lay down there came another rap, so. [Raps on
the table with her knuckles.] And then I saw Mees, his face was pale,
pale as--God! Oh, God! and there was nothing. Nothing but the wind.

KNEIRTJE. [In deadly fear.] Rapped three times? Three times?

MARIETJE. Each time--like that, so----[Raps.]

JO. You stupid, you, to scare the old woman into a fit with your
raps. [A rap. All startled. Enter Saart and Truus.]

SAART. How scared you all look! Good evening, Miss.

TRUUS. May we come in awhile?

JO. Hey! Thank God you've come.

SAART. Nasty outside! My ears and neck full of sand, and it's
cold. Just throw a couple of blocks on the fire.

TRUUS. I couldn't stand it at home either, children asleep, no one
to talk to, and the howling of the wind. Two mooring posts were
washed away.

KNEIR. [Darning a sock.] Two mooring posts!

SAART. Talk about something else.

JO. Yes, I say so too. What's that to us----Milk and sugar? Yes, eh?

SAART. What a question! I take coffee without sugar!

JO. Well, Geert never takes sugar.

CLEMENTINE. Your little son was a brave boy, Truus. I can see him
now as he stood waving good-bye.

TRUUS. [Knitting.] Yes, that boy's a treasure, barely twelve. You
should have seen him two and a half months ago. When the Anna came
in without Ari. The child behaved like an angel, just like a grown
man. He would sit up evenings to chat with me, the child knows more
than I do. The lamb, hope he's not been awfully sea sick.

SAART. [Knitting.] Now, you may not believe it, but red spectacles
keep you from being sea sick.

JO. [Mending a flannel garment.] Hahaha! Did you ever try it
yourself? You're like the doctors, they let others swallow their doses.

SAART. Many's the night I've slept on board; when my husband was
alive I went along on many a voyage.

JO. Should like to have seen you in oil skins.

CLEMENTINE. Were you ever married, Saart?

SAART. Hear, now, the young lady is flattering me. I'm not so bad
looking as that, Miss. Yes, I was married. Spliced good and fast,
too! He was a good man. An excellent man. Now and then, when things
didn't go to suit him, without speaking ill of the dead, I may say,
he couldn't keep his paws at home; then he'd smash things. I still
have a coffee pot without a handle I keep as a remembrance.--I wouldn't
part with it for a rix dollar.

CLEMENTINE. I won't even offer you a guilder! Hahaha!

JO. Say, you're such a funny story teller, tell us about the Harlemmer
oil, Saart.

SAART. Yes, if it hadn't been for Harlemmer oil I might not have been
a widow. I could marry again!

CLEMENTINE. How odd!

JO. You must hear her talk. Come, drink faster!

SAART. I'm full to the brim! What are you staring at Kneir? That's just
the wind. Now, then, my man was a comical chap. Never was another like
him. I'd bought him a knife in a leather sheath, paid a good price
for it too, and when he'd come back in five weeks and I'd ask him:
"Jacob, have you lost your knife?" he'd say, "I don't know about my
knife--you never gave me a knife." He was that scatter-brained. But
when he'd undress himself for the first time in five weeks, and pulled
off his rubber boots, bang, the knife would fall on the floor. He
hadn't felt it in all that time.

CLEMENTINE. Didn't take off his rubber boots in five weeks?

SAART. Then I had to scrub 'im with soap and soda; he hadn't seen
water, and covered with vermin.

CLEMENTINE. Hey! Ugh!

SAART. Wish I could get a cent a dozen for all the lice on board;
they get them thrown in with their share of the cargo. Hahaha! Now
then, his last voyage a sheet of water threw him against the bulwarks
just as they pulled the mizzen staysail to larboard, and his leg was
broke. Then they were in a fix--The skipper could poultice and cut a
corn, but he couldn't mend a broken leg. Then they wanted to shove a
plank under it, but Jacob wanted Harlemmer oil rubbed on his leg. Every
day he had them rub it with Harlemmer oil, and again Harlemmer oil,
and some more Harlemmer oil. Ach, the poor thing! When they came in
his leg was a sight. You shouldn't have asked me to tell it.

JO. Last time you laughed about it yourself.

SAART. Now, yes; you can't bring the dead back to life. And when you
think of it, it's a dirty shame I can't marry again.

CLEMENTINE. Why not? Who prevents you?

SAART. Who? Those that pieced together the silly laws! A year later
the Changeable went down with man and mouse. Then, bless me, you'd
suppose, as your husband was dead, for he'd gone along with his leg
and a half, you could marry another man. No, indeed. First you must
advertise for him in the newspapers three times, and then if in three
times he don't turn up, you may go and get a new license.

TRUUS. [Monotonously knitting.] I don't think I'll ever marry again.

SAART. That's not surprisin' when you've been married twice already;
if you don't know the men by this time.

TRUUS. I wish I could talk about things the way you do. No, it's
anxiety. With my first it was a horror; with my second you know
yourselves.

CLEMENTINE. Go on, Truus. I could sit up all night hearing tales of
the sea.

KNEIRTJE. Don't tell stories of suffering and death----

SAART. Hey! How fretful you are! Come, pour us some more coffee.

TRUUS. [Quietly knitting and speaking in a toneless voice.] Ach,
it couldn't have happened here, Kneir. We lived in Vlaardingen then,
and I'd been married a year without any children. No, Pietje was Ari's
child--and he went away on the Magnet. Yes, it was the Magnet. On the
herring catch. That's gone up now. And you understand what happened;
else I wouldn't have got acquainted with Ari and be living next door
to you now. The Magnet stayed on the sands or some other place. But
I didn't know that then, and so didn't think of it.

JO. Ssst! Keep still!

SAART. It's nothing. Only the wind.

TRUUS. Now in Vlaardingen they have a tower and on the tower a lookout.

MARIETJE. Same as at Maassluis.

TRUUS. And this lookout hoists a red ball when he sees a lugger or
a trawler or other boat in the distance. And when he sees who it
is, he lets down the ball, runs to the ship owner and the families
to warn them; that's to say: the Albert Koster or the Good Hope is
coming. Now mostly he's no need to warn the family. For, as soon as
the ball is hoisted in the tower, the children run in the streets
shouting, I did it, too, as a child: "The ball is up! The ball is
up!" Then the women run, and wait below for the lookout to come down,
and when it's their ship they give him pennies.

CLEMENTINE. And then----

TRUUS. [Staring into the fire.] And--and--the Magnet with my first
husband, didn't I say I'd been married a year? The Magnet stayed out
seven weeks--with provisions for six--and each time the children
shouted: "The ball is up, Truus! The ball is up, Truus!" Then I
ran like mad to the tower. No one looked at me. They all knew why
I ran, and when the lookout came down I could have torn the words
out of his mouth. But I would say: "Have you tidings--tidings of
the Magnet?" Then he'd say: "No, it's the Maria," or the Alert,
or the Concordia, and then I'd drag myself away slowly, so slowly,
crying and thinking of my husband. My husband! And each day, when
the children shouted, I got a shock through my brain, and each day I
stood by the tower, praying that God--but the Magnet did not come--did
not come. At the last I didn't dare to go to the tower any more when
the ball was hoisted. No longer dared to stand at the door waiting,
if perhaps the lookout himself would bring the message. That lasted
two months--two months--and then--well, then I believed it. [Toneless
voice.] The fish are dearly paid for.

CLEMENTINE. [After a silence.] And Ari?--What happened to him?

TRUUS. Ari?

JO. Now, that's so short a time since.

TRUUS. [Calmly.] Ach, child, I'd love to talk about it to every
one, all day long. When you've been left with six children--a good
man--never gave me a harsh word--never. In two hours he was gone. A
blow from the capstan Bar. He never spoke again. Had it happened six
days later they would have brought him in. We would have buried him
here. The sharks already swam about the ship. They smell when there's
a corpse aboard.

KNEIRTJE. Yes, that's true, you never see them otherwise.

TRUUS. [Resigned.] You'll never marry a fisherman, Miss; but it's sad,
sad; God, so sad! when they lash your dear one to a plank, wrapped in
a piece of sail with a stone in it, three times around the big mast,
and then, one, two, three, in God's name. The fish are dearly paid
for. [Sobs softly.]

JO. [Rising and embracing her.] Now, Truus!

SAART. Pour her out another bowl. [To Marietje.] Are you crying
again? She keeps thinking of Mees?

MARIETJE. No, I wasn't thinking of Mees, I was thinking of my little
brother, who was also drowned.

JO. [Nervously.] You all seem to enjoy it.

CLEMENTINE. Wasn't that on the herring catch?

MARIETJE. [Going on with her knitting.] His second voyage, a blow
from the fore sail, and he lay overboard. He was rope caster. The
skipper reached him the herring shovel, but it was smooth and it
slipped from his hands. Then Jerusalem, the mate, held out the broom
to him--again he grabbed hold. The three of them pulled him up; then
the broom gave way, he fell back into the waves, and for the third
time the skipper threw him a line. God wanted my little brother, the
line broke, and the end went down with him to the bottom of the sea.

CLEMENTINE. Frightful! frightful!--Grabbed it three times, and lost
it three times.

MARIETJE. As if the child knew what was coming in the morning, he had
lain crying all night. So the skipper told. Crying for Mother, who was
sick. When the skipper tried to console him, he said: "No, skipper,
even if Mother does get well, I eat my last herring today." That's
what started Father to drinking.

CLEMENTINE. Now, Marietje.

MARIETJE. No, truly, Miss, when he came back from Pieterse's with the
money, Toontje's share of the cargo as rope caster, eighteen guilders
and thirty-five cents for five and a half weeks. Then he simply acted
insane, he threw the money on the ground, then he cursed at--I won't
repeat what--at everything. And I, how old was I then? Fourteen. I
picked up the money, crying. We needed it. Mother's sickness and burial
had cost a lot. Eighteen guilders is a heap of money, a big heap.

JO. Eighteen guilders for your child, eighteen--[Listening in alarm
to the blasts of the wind.] Hush! keep still!

SAART. Nothing, nothing at all! What makes you so afraid tonight?

JO. Afraid? I afraid? No, say, Hahaha!----

KNEIRTJE. [Staring straight ahead.] Yes, yes, if the water could
only speak.

CLEMENTINE. Come now, you tell a tale of the sea. You've had so
much experience.

KNEIRTJE. A tale? Ach, Miss, life on the sea is no tale. Nothing
between yourself and eternity but the thickness of a one-inch
plank. It's hard on the men, and hard on the women. Yesterday I passed
by the garden of the Burgomaster. They sat at table and ate cod from
which the steam was rising, and the children sat with folded hands
saying grace. Then, thought I, in my ignorance--if it was wrong, may
God forgive me--that it wasn't right of the Burgomaster--not right
of him--and not right of the others. For the wind blew so hard out
of the East, and those fish came out of the same water in which our
dead--how shall I say it?--in which our dead--you understand me. [A
pause.] It was foolish to think such nonsense. It is our living,
and we must not rebel against our living.

TRUUS. Yes, I know how that is.

KNEIRTJE. [Quietly darning.] My husband was a fisherman. One out of a
thousand. When the lead was dropped he could tell by the taste of the
sand where they were. Often in the night he'd say we are on the 56th
and on the 56th they'd be. And what experiences he had sailing! Once
he drifted about two days and nights in a boat with two others. That
was the time they were taking in the net and a fog came up so thick
they couldn't see the buoys, let alone find the lugger. Two days and
nights without food. Later when the boat went to pieces--you should
have heard him tell it--how he and old Dirk swam to an overturned
rowboat; he climbed on top. "I'll never forget that night," said
he. Dirk was too old or tired to get a hold. Then my husband stuck
his knife into the boat. Dirk tried to grasp it as he was sinking,
and he clutched in such a way that three of his fingers hung
down. Yes! yes! It all happened. Then at the risk of his own life,
my husband pulled Dirk up onto the overturned boat. So the two of
them drifted in the night, and Dirk--old Dirk--from loss of blood
or from fear, went insane. He sat and glared at my husband with the
eyes of a cat. He raved of the devil that was in him. Of Satan, and
the blood, my husband said, ran all over the boat--the waves were
kept busy washing it away. Just at dawn Dirk slipped off, insane
as he was. My man was picked up by a freighter that sailed by. But
it was no use, three years later--that's twelve years ago now--the
Clementine--named after you by your father--stranded on the Doggerbanks
with him and my two oldest. Of what happened to them, I know nothing,
nothing at all. Never a buoy, or a hatch, washed ashore. Nothing more,
nothing. You can't realize it at first, but after so many years one
can't recall their faces any more, and that's a blessing. For hard it
would be if one remembered. Now, I've told my story. Every sailor's
wife has something like this in her family, it's not new. Truus is
right: "The fish are dearly paid for." Are you crying, Miss?

CLEMENTINE. [Bursting out.] God! If any ships should go down tonight.

KNEIRTJE. We are all in God's hands, and God is great and good.

JO. [Springing up wildly.] Ships go down! Ships go down! The one
howls. The other cries. I wish I'd sat alone tonight. [Beating her
head with her fists.] You're all driving me mad, mad, mad!

CLEMENTINE. [Amazed.] Jo, what ails you?

JO. [Passionately.] Her husband and her little brother--and my poor
uncle--those horrible stories--instead of cheering us up! Ask me now
for my story! [Shrieking.] My father was drowned, drowned, drowned,
drowned! There are others--all--drowned, drowned!--and--you are all
miserable wretches--you are! [Violently bangs the door shut as she
runs out.]

TRUUS. [Anxiously.] I believe she's afraid.

MARIETJE. Shall I go after her?

KNEIRTJE. No, child, she will quiet down by herself. Nervous strain
of the last two days. Are you going now, Miss?

CLEMENTINE. It has grown late, Kneir, and your niece--your niece was a
little unmannerly. No, I'm not offended. Who is going to take me home?

SAART. If one goes, we all go. Together we won't blow away. Good
night, Kneir.

MARIETJE. [Depressed.] Good night, Aunt Kneir.

KNEIRTJE. Thank you again, Miss, for the soup and eggs.

TRUUS. Are you coming to drink a bowl with me tomorrow night? Please
say yes.

KNEIRTJE. Well, perhaps. Good night, Miss. Good night, Marietje. Good
night, Saart. If you see Jo send her in at once. [All go out except
Kneirtje. She clears away the cups. A fierce wind howls, shrieking
about the house. She listens anxiously at the window, shoves her
chair close to the chimney, stares into the fire. Her lips move in
a muttered prayer while she fingers a rosary. Jo enters, drops into
a chair by the window and nervously unpins her shawl.]

KNEIRTJE. You'd better go to bed. You are all unstrung. What an
outburst! And that dear child that came out in the storm to bring me
soup and eggs.

JO. [Roughly.] Your sons are out in the storm for her and her father.

KNEIRTJE. And for us.

JO. And for us. [A silence.] The sea is so wild.

KNEIRTJE. Have you been to look?

JO. [Anxiously.] I couldn't stand against the wind. Half the guard
rail is washed away, the pier is under water. [A silence. Kneirtje
prays.] Oh! Oh! I'm dead from those miserable stories!

KNEIRTJE. You're not yourself tonight. You never went on like this
when Geert sailed with the Navy. Go to bed and pray. Prayer is the
only consolation. A sailor's wife must not be weak. In a month or two
it will storm again; each time again. And there are many fishermen on
the sea besides our boys. [Her speech sinks into a soft murmur. Her
old fingers handle the rosary.]

JO. Barend, we almost drove him away! I taunted him to the
last. [Seeing that Kneirtje prays, she walks to the window wringing
her hands, pulls up the curtain uncertainly, stares through the window
panes. Then she cautiously opens a window shutter. The wind blows the
curtain on high, the lamp dances, the light puffs out. She swiftly
closes the window.]

KNEIRTJE. [Angry from fear.] Have you gone crazy! Keep your paws off
that window!

JO. [Moaning.] Oh! oh! oh!----

KNEIRTJE. [Terrified.] Shut your mouth! Look for the matches! Not so
slow! Quick! Beside the soap dish. [A silence.] Have you got them? [Jo
lights the lamp, shivering with fear.] I'm completely chilled. [To Jo,
who crouches sobbing by the chimney.] Why do you sit there?

JO. I'm afraid.

KNEIRTJE. [Anxiously.] You must not be.

JO. If anything happens--then--then----

KNEIRTJE. Be sensible. Undress yourself.

JO. No, I shall stay here all night.

KNEIRTJE. Now, I ask you, how will it be when you're married? When
you are a mother yourself?

JO. [Passionately.] You don't know what you say! You don't know
what you say, Aunt Kneir! If Geert--[Stops, panting.] I didn't dare
tell you.

KNEIRTJE. Is it between you and Geert? [Jo sobs loudly.] That was not
good of you--not good--to have secrets. Your lover--your husband--is
my son. [A silence, the wind shrieks.] Don't stare that way into the
fire. Don't cry any more. I shall not speak any hard words. Even if
it was wrong of you and of him. Come and sit opposite to me, then
together we will--[Lays her prayerbook on the table.]

JO. [Despairingly.] I don't want to pray.

KNEIRTJE. Don't want to pray?

JO. [Excitedly.] If anything happens----

KNEIRTJE. [Vehemently.] Nothing will happen!

JO. [Wildly.] If anything--anything--anything--then I'll never pray
again, never again. Then there is no God. No Mother Mary--then there
is nothing--nothing----

KNEIRTJE. [Anxiously.] Don't talk like that.

JO. What good is a child without a husband!

KNEIRTJE. How dare you say that?

JO. [Beating her head on the table.] The wind! It drives me mad, mad!

KNEIRTJE. [Opens the prayerbook, touches Jo's arm. Jo looks up, sobbing
passionately, sees the prayerbook, shakes her head fiercely. Again
wailing, drops to the floor, which she beats with her hands. Kneirtje's
trembling voice sounds.] Oh Merciful God! I trust! With a firm faith,
I trust. [The wind races with wild lashings about the house.]


                                CURTAIN.








ACT IV.


[An old-fashioned office. Left, office door, separated from the
main office by a wooden railing. Between this door and railing are
two benches; an old cupboard. In the background; three windows with
view of the sunlit sea. In front of the middle window a standing
desk and high stool. Right, writing table with telephone--a safe,
an inside door. On the walls, notices of wreckage, insurance, maps,
etc. In the center a round iron stove.]

[Kaps, Bos and Mathilde discovered.]

MATHILDE. Clemens!----

KAPS. [Reading, with pipe in his mouth.] "The following wreckage,
viz.: 2,447 ribs, marked Kusta; ten sail sheets, marked 'M. S. G.'"

MATHILDE. Stop a moment, Kaps.

KAPS. "Four deck beams, two spars, five"----

MATHILDE. [Giving him a tap.] Finish your reading later.

KAPS. Yes, Mevrouw.

BOS. [Impatiently.] I have no time now.

MATHILDE. Then make time. I have written the circular for the tower
bell. Say, ring up the Burgomaster.

BOS. [Ringing impatiently.] Quick! Connect me with the
Burgomaster! Yes! This damn bother while I'm busy. Up to my ears
in--[Sweetly.] Are you there? My little wife asks----

MATHILDE. If Mevrouw will come to the telephone about the circular.

BOS. [Irritably.] Yes! yes! Not so long drawn--[Sweetly.] If Mevrouw
will come to the telephone a moment? Just so, Burgomaster,--the
ladies--hahaha! That's a good one. [Curtly.] Now? What do you want
to say? Cut it short. [To Mathilde.]

MATHILDE. Here, read this circular out loud. Then it can go to the
printers.

BOS. [Angrily.] That whole sheet! Are you crazy? Do you think I
haven't anything on my mind! That damned----

MATHILDE. Keep your temper! Kaps!----

BOS. Go to hell! [Sweetly.] Yes, Mevrouw. Tomorrow. My wife? No,
she can't come to the telephone herself, she doesn't know
how. [Irritably.] Where is the rag? Hurry up! [Reaches out hand for
paper. Mathilde hands it to him.] My wife has written the circular for
the tower bell. Are you listening? [Reads.] "Date, postmark, MM." What
did you say? You would rather have L. S.? Yes, yes, quite right. Do you
hear? [Reads.] "You are no doubt acquainted with the new church."--She
says, "No," the stupid! I am reading, Mevrouw, again. "You are no
doubt acquainted with the new church. The church has, as you know,
a high tower; that high tower points upward, and that is good, that is
fortunate, and truly necessary for many children of our generation"----

MATHILDE. Read more distinctly.

BOS. [To Mathilde.] Shut your mouth. Pardon, I was speaking to
my bookkeeper. [In telephone.] Yes--yes--ha, ha, ha--[Reads again
from paper.] "But that tower could do something else that also is
good. Yes, and very useful. It can mark the time for us children of the
times. That it does not do. It stands there since 1882 and has never
answered to the question, 'What time is it?' That it should do. It
was indeed built for it, there are four places visible for faces;
for years in all sorts of ways"--Did you say anything? No?--"for years
the wish has been expressed by the surrounding inhabitants that they
might have a clock--About three hundred guilders are needed. Who will
help? The Committee, Mevrouw"--What did you say? Yes, you know the
names, of course. Yes, very nicely worded? Yes--Yes--All the ladies of
the Committee naturally sign for the same amount, a hundred guilders
each? Yes--Yes--Very well--My wife will be at home, Mevrouw. [Rings off
angrily.] Damned nonsense!--a hundred guilders gone to the devil! What
is it to you if there's a clock on the damn thing or not?

MATHILDE. [Turns away.] I'll let you fry in your own fat.

BOS. She'll be here in her carriage in quarter of an hour.

MATHILDE. Bejour! bejour! If you drank less grog in the evenings
you wouldn't have such a bad temper in the mornings. Just hand me
five guilders.

BOS. No, no! You took five guilders out of my purse this morning
while I was asleep. I can keep no----

MATHILDE. I take a rix dollar! What an infamous lie. Just one
guilder! Bah, what a man, who counts his money before he goes to bed!

BOS. Bejour! bejour!

MATHILDE. Very well, don't give it--Then I can treat the Burgomaster's
wife to a glass of gin presently--three jugs of old gin and not a
single bottle of port or sherry! [Bos angrily throws down two rix
dollars.] Say, am I your servant? If it wasn't for me you wouldn't
be throwing rix dollars around!--Bah! [Goes off angrily.]

KAPS. [Reading.] IJmuiden, 24 December--Today there were four sloops
in the market with 500 to 800 live and 1,500 to 2,100 dead haddock
and some--live cod--The live cod brought 7 1/4--the dead----

BOS. Haven't you anything else to do?

KAPS. The dead haddock brought thirteen and a half guilders a basket.

BOS. [Knocking on the desk.] I know all that! Here, take hold! Take
your book--turn to the credit page of the Expectation----

KAPS. [Looking.] The Jacoba? no, the Queen Wilhelmina? no, the
Mathilde? no--the Good Hope?--We can whistle for her. The Expectation?

BOS. What was the gross total?

KAPS. Fourteen hundred and forty-three guilders and forty-seven cents.

BOS. I thought so. How could you be so ungodly stupid, to deduct four
guilders, 88, for the widows and orphans' fund?

KAPS. Let's see. [Figuring.]--1,443--3 per cent off--that's
1,400--that's gross three hundred and 87 guilders--yes, it should be
three guilders, 88, instead of four, 88.

BOS. [Rising.] If you're going into your dotage, Jackass! you can
go. Your errors are always on the wrong side!

KAPS. [With a knowing laugh.] There might be something to say against
that, Meneer--you didn't go after me when, when----

BOS. Now, that'll do, that'll do!----

KAPS. And that was an error with a couple of big ciphers after it. [Bos
goes off impatiently at right.] Hehehe! It all depends on what side----

[Looks around, sees Bos is gone, pokes up the fire; fills his pipe from
Bos's tobacco jar, carefully steals a couple of cigars from his box.]

SIMON. [Entering.] Is Bos here?

KAPS. Mynheer Bos, eh?--no.

SIMON. Is he out?

KAPS. Can't you give me the message?

SIMON. I ask you, is he out?

KAPS. Yes.

SIMON. No tidings?

KAPS. No. Has this running back and forth begun again? Meneer said
that when he got news, he----

SIMON. It will be nine weeks tomorrow.

KAPS. The Jacoba came in after fifty-nine days' lost time.

SIMON. You are--You know more than you let on.

KAPS. Are you loaded already?

SIMON. Not a drop.

KAPS. Then it's time--I know more, eh? I'm holding off the ships by
ropes, eh?

SIMON. I warned you folks when that ship lay in the docks. What were
the words I spoke then, eh?

KAPS. [Shrugging his shoulders.] All tales on your part for a glass
of gin!

SIMON. You lie. You was there, and the Miss was there. I says,
"The ship is rotten, that caulking was damn useless. That a floating
coffin like that"----

KAPS. Good! that's what you said. I don't deny it. What of it? Are
you so clever that when you're half drunk----

SIMON. [Angry.] That's a damned lie!

KAPS. Not drunk then, are you such an authority, you a shipmaster's
assistant, that when you say "no," and the owner and the Insurance
Company say "yes," my employer must put his ship in the dry docks?

SIMON. Damned rot! I warned you! And now, I say--now, I say--that
if Mees, my daughter's betrothed, not to speak of the others, if
Mees--there will be murder.

KAPS. You make me laugh! Go get yourself a dram and talk sense.

[Enter Marietje.]

SIMON. Better have stayed outside. No tidings.

MARIETJE. [Softly sobbing.] No tidings.

SIMON. Murder will come of it. [Both off.]

BOS. [Enters.] Who's here?

KAPS. Simon and his daughter. Threats! Are you going out?

BOS. Threats! Is the fellow insane? I'll be back in ten
minutes. Whoever comes must wait.

KAPS. He spoke of----

BOS. I don't care to hear! [Off.]

KAPS. [Goes back to his desk; the telephone rings. He solemnly listens
at the receiver.] Can't understand you. I am the bookkeeper. Mynheer
will be back in ten minutes. Ring up again.

[Enter Saart.]

SAART. Good day, my dear.

KAPS. You here again? What do you want?

SAART. I want you--Jesus! What a cold wind! May I warm my hands
a moment?

KAPS. Stay on that side of the railing.

SAART. Sweet beast! You make me tired. Mynheer Bos just went round the
corner. [Warms herself.] No use asking about the Hope. Jesus! Seven
families. How lucky that outside of the children there were three
unmarried men on board. Nothing washed ashore anywhere?

KAPS. No, no!

SAART. Now, don't eat me up.

KAPS. I wish you'd stay behind the railing. What do you want?

SAART. [Looking in his pocket.] Look out! Or you'll break Meneer's
cigars. Old thief! [He smiles.] Kaps, do you want to make a guilder?

KAPS. That depends.

SAART. I'm engaged to Bol, the skipper.

KAPS. I congratulate you!

SAART. He's lying here, with a load of peat for the city. Now, how
can I marry him?

KAPS. How can you?

SAART. I can't; because they don't know if my husband's dead.

KAPS. The legal limit is----

SAART. I know that much myself.

KAPS. You must summons him, 'pro Deo,' three times in the papers and
if he doesn't come then, and that he'll not do, for there aren't any
more ghosts in the world, then you can----

SAART. Now, if you'd attend to this little matter, Bol and I would
always be grateful to you.

KAPS. That is lawyer's business. You must go to the city for that.

SAART. Gracious, what botheration! When your common sense tells you
I haven't seen Jacob in three years and the----

[Cobus enters, trembling with agitation.]

COB. There are tidings! There are tidings!

KAPS. Tidings? What are you telling us?

COB. [Almost crying.] There must be tidings of the boys--of--of--the
Hope.

KAPS. Nothing! [Friendlier.] Now, there is no use in your coming
to this office day after day. I haven't any good news to give you,
the bad you already know. Sixty-two days----

COB. The water bailiff received a telegram. Ach, ach, ach; Meneer Kaps,
help us out of this uncertainty. My sister--and my niece--are simply
insane with grief. [Trembling violently.]

KAPS. On my word of honor. Are you running away again?

COB. My niece is sitting alone at home--my sister is at the Priest's,
cleaning house. There must be something--there must be something.

KAPS. Who made you believe that?

COB. The water bailiff's clerk said--said--Ach, dear God----[Off.]

SAART. Perhaps he is right.

KAPS. Everything is possible.

SAART. Has Meneer Bos any hope?

KAPS. Hope? Nine weeks! that old ship! after that storm--all things
are possible. No, I wouldn't give a cent for it. Provisions for
six weeks. If they had run into an English harbor, we would have
had tidings.

CLEMENTINE. [Enters.] Good day, Saart. Are there visitors inside, Kaps?

KAPS. [Looking through window.] The Burgomaster's carriage. Committee
meeting for the clock. A new span. I wish I had their money.

CLEMENTINE. [Laying her sketch book on Kaps's desk.] I saw Cobus go
by. Poor thing! How he has aged. I hardly recognized him. [Opening
the sketch book.] Look. That's the way he was three months ago,
hale and jolly. You may look, too, Kaps.

KAPS. No, Miss, I haven't the time.

SAART. Daantje's death was a blow to him--you always saw them together,
always discussing. Now he hasn't a friend in the "Home"; that makes
a big difference.

CLEMENTINE. Do you recognize these?

SAART. Well, that's Kneir, that's Barend with the basket on his back,
and that's--[The telephone bell rings. Clementine closes her book.]

KAPS. Meneer is out. They rang once before.

CLEMENTINE. [Listening at telephone.] Yes!--Papa isn't here. How long
will he be, Kaps?

KAPS. Two or three minutes.

CLEMENTINE. [Startled.] What did you say? A hatch marked
47--and--[Trembling.]--I don't understand you. [Screams and lets the
receiver fall.]

KAPS. What's that? What's that?

CLEMENTINE. [Painfully shocked.] I don't dare listen--Oh, oh!

KAPS. Was that the water bailiff?

CLEMENTINE. [Passionately.] Barend washed ashore. Oh God, now it
is ended!

SAART. Barend?----Barend?----

CLEMENTINE. A telegram from Nieuwediep. A hatch--and a corpse----

[Enter Bos.]

BOS. What's going on here? Why are you crying?

KAPS. Tidings of the Good Hope.

BOS. Tidings?

KAPS. The water bailiff is on the 'phone.

BOS. The water bailiff?--Step aside--Go along, you! What are you
gaping at?

SAART. I--I--[Goes timidly off.]

BOS. [Ringing.] Hello! Who is that? The water bailiff? A
telegram from Nieuwediep? North of the Hook? I don't understand
a word! Stop your howling! a hatch, you say? 47?--Well,
that's damned--miserable--that! the corpse--advanced stage of
decomposition! Barend--mustered in as oldest boy! Recognized by
who? by--oh!--The Expectation has come into Nieuwediep disabled? And
did Skipper Maatsuiker recognize him? Earrings? Yes, yes, silver
earrings. No, never mind that. So it isn't necessary to send any
one from here for the identification? Yes, damned sad--yes--yes--we
are in God's hand--Yes--yes--I no longer had any doubts--thank
you--yes--I'd like to get the official report as soon as possible. I
will inform the underwriters, bejour! [Hangs up the receiver.] I'm
simply dead! twelve men!

KAPS. Barend? Kneirtje's son? Washed ashore? That's--that's a wonder. I
never expected to hear of the ship again. With the Clementine.

BOS. [Angrily.] Yes--yes--yes--yes--[To Clementine.] Go inside to
your mother! What stupidity to repeat what you heard in that woman's
presence. It won't be five minutes now till half the village is
here! Don't you understand me? You sit there, God save me, and take
on as if your lover was aboard----

CLEMENTINE. Why didn't you listen? [Sobs softly.]

BOS. Listen!

CLEMENTINE. When Simon, the shipbuilder's assistant----

BOS. The fellow was drunk.

CLEMENTINE. [Firmly.] He was not!

BOS. He was, too! And if he hadn't been, what right have you to stick
your nose into matters you don't understand?

CLEMENTINE. Dear God, now I am also guilty----

BOS. [Angrily.] Guilty? Guilty! Have the novels you read gone to
your head? Guilty! Are you possessed, to use those words after such
an accident?

CLEMENTINE. He said that the ship was a floating coffin. Then I heard
you say that in any case it would be the last voyage for the Hope.

BOS. [Angrily at first.] That damned boarding school; those damned
boarding school fads! Walk if you like through the village like a fool,
sketching the first rascal or beggar you meet! But don't blab out
things you can be held to account for. A floating coffin! Say, rather,
a drunken authority--The North, of Pieterse, and the Surprise and the
Willem III and the Young John. I can keep on naming them. Half of the
fishing fleet and half the merchant fleet are floating coffins. Did
you hear that, Kaps?

KAPS. [Timidly.] No, Meneer, I don't hear anything.

BOS. If you had asked me: "Father, how is this?" I would have explained
it to you. But you conceited young people meddle with everything and
more, too! What stronger proof is there than the yearly inspection of
the ships by the underwriters? Do you suppose that when I presently
ring up the underwriter and say to him, "Meneer, you can plank down
fourteen hundred guilders"--that he does that on loose grounds? You
ought to have a face as red as a buoy in shame for the way you flapped
out your nonsense! Nonsense, I say! Nonsense; that might take away
my good name, if I wasn't so well known.

CLEMENTINE. [Sadly.] If I were a ship owner--and I heard----

BOS. God preserve the fishery from an owner who makes drawings and
cries over pretty vases! I stand as a father at the head of a hundred
homes. Business is business. When you get sensitive you go head over
heels. What, Kaps? [Kaps makes a motion that he cannot hear.] Now,
go to your mother. The Burgomaster's wife is making a call.

KAPS. Here is the muster roll. [Reading.] Willem Hengst, aged
thirty-seven, married, four children----

BOS. Wait a moment till my daughter----

CLEMENTINE. I won't speak another word.

KAPS. [Reading on.] Jacob Zwart, aged thirty-five years, married,
three children. Gerrit Plas, aged twenty-five years, married, one
child. Geert Vermeer, unmarried, aged twenty-six years. Nellis Boom,
aged thirty-five years, married, seven children. Klaas Steen, aged
twenty-four years, married. Solomon Bergen, aged twenty-five years,
married, one child. Mari Stad, aged forty-five years, married. Mees,
aged nineteen years. Jacob Boom, aged twenty years. Barend Vermeer,
aged nineteen years. Pietje Stappers, aged twelve years.

BOS. [Cast down.] Seven homes.

CLEMENTINE. Sixteen children.

[Enter Truus and Marietje.]

TRUUS. [Panting.] Are there tidings? Tidings of my little son? [Wild
despair.] Ach, God! Ach, God; don't make me unhappy, Meneer!----

BOS. I'm sorry, Mrs. Stappers----

MARIETJE. [Shrieking.] It can't be! It can't be! You lie!--It isn't
possible!----

BOS. [Gently.] The Burgomaster at Nieuwediep has telegraphed the water
bailiff. Barend Vermeer was washed ashore. You know what that means,
and a hatch of the 47----

TRUUS. [Loudly.] Oh, Mother Mary, must I lose that child, too? that
lamb of twelve years! [With a whimpering cry.] Oh, oh, oh, oh! Oh,
oh, oh, oh!--Pietje--Pietje----

MARIETJE. [Bewildered.] Then--Then--[Bursts into a hysterical
laugh.] Hahaha!--Hahaha!----

BOS. Give her a glass of water.

MARIETJE. [Striking the glass from Clementine's hand.] Go away! Go
away! [Falling on her knees, her hands catching hold of the railing
gate.] Let me die!--Let me die, please, dear God, dear God!

CLEMENTINE. [Sobbing.] Come Marietje, be calm; get up.

TRUUS. On his first voyage. And so brave; as he stood there, waving,
when the ship--[Sobs loudly.]

BOS. It can't be helped, Truus. It is a visitation. There hasn't
been a storm like that in years. Think of Hengst with four children,
and Jacob and Gerrit--And, although it's no consolation, I will hand
you your boy's wages today, if you like. Both of you go home now and
resign yourselves to the inevitable--take her with you--she seems----

MARIETJE. [With trembling sobs.] I don't want to go home. I want to
die, die----

CLEMENTINE. [Supporting her.] Cry, Marietje, cry, poor lamb----

[They go off.]

BOS. [Angrily walking back and forth.] What's the matter with you? Are
you too lazy to put pen to paper today? You needn't answer! Have you
the Widows' and Orphans' fund at hand? Well!

KAPS. [Shuffling to the safe.] The top drawer is still locked. [Bos
throws him the keys.] Oh, thank you. [Opens the safe, shuffles back
to Bos's desk with the book.] If you please, Meneer.

BOS. Ninety-five widows, fourteen old sailors and fishermen.

KAPS. Yes, the fund fell short some time ago. We will have to put in
another appeal.

MATHILDE. [Entering.] Clemens, what a misfortune! The Burgomaster's
wife asks if you will come in for a moment. She sits there crying.

BOS. No! Crying enough here. No time!

MATHILDE. Ach! Ach! Kaps, here is the copy for the circular. Hurry,
do you hear!

BOS. Talk to her about making a public appeal for the unfortunates.

MATHILDE. Yes, but, Clemens, isn't that overdoing it, two begging
parties?

BOS. I will do it myself, then--[Both exit.]

CLEMENTINE. [Enters. Softly weeping.] Kaps! Kaps! [Goes to his desk
and sits down opposite to him.] I feel so miserable----

KAPS. Very unwise, Miss. Many ships go down. The Good Hope scarcely
counts. I have it here. Where is it? where is it? The statement of
Veritas for October--October alone; lost, 105 sailing vessels and
30 steamships--that's a low estimate; fifteen hundred dead in one
month. [Pointing to the sea.] Yes, when you see it as it appears
today, so smooth, with the floating gulls, you wouldn't believe that
it murders so many people.

[Enter Jo and Cobus.]

CLEMENTINE. [To Jo and Cobus, who sit alone in a dazed way.] Come in,
Jo. Jo! [Jo slowly shakes her head.]

COB. [Trembling.] We have just run from home--for Saart just as I
said--just as I said----

[Enter Bos.]

BOS. [To Jo.] Here, sit down. [Shoves a chair by the stove.] You stay
where you are, Cobus. You have no doubt heard?----

JO. [Sobbing.] About Barend? Yes, but Geert! It happens so often that
they get off in row boats.

BOS. I can't give you that consolation. Not only was there a hatch,
but the corpse was in an extreme state of dissolution.

JO. [Anxiously.] Yes! Yes! But if it shouldn't be Barend. Who says
it was Barend?

BOS. Skipper Maatsuiker of the Expectation identified him, and the
earrings.

JO. Maatsuiker? Maatsuiker? And if--he should be mistaken----I've
come to ask you for money, Meneer, so I can go to the Helder myself.

BOS. Come, that's foolish!

JO. [Crying.] Barend must be buried any way.

BOS. The Burgomaster of Nieuwediep will take care of that----

[Enter Simon.]

SIMON. [Drunk.] I--I--heard----[Makes a strong gesture towards Bos.]

BOS. [Nervous vehemence.] Get out, you drunken sot!

SIMON. [Stammering.] I--I--won't murder you. I--I--have no evil
intentions----

BOS. [Trembling.] Send for a policeman, Kaps. Must that drunken
fellow----

SIMON. [Steadying himself by holding to the gate.] No--stay where
you are--I'm going--I--I--only wanted to say how nicely it came
out--with--with--The Good Hope.

BOS. You get out, immediately!

SIMON. Don't come so close to me--never come so close to a man with
a knife----No-o-o-o--I have no bad intentions. I only wanted to say,
that I warned you--when--she lay in the docks.

BOS. You lie, you rascal!

SIMON. Now just for the joke of it--you ask--ask--ask your bookkeeper
and your daughter--who were there----

BOS. [Vehemently.] That's a lie. You're not worth an answer, you sot! I
have nothing to do with you! My business is with your employer. Did
you understand me, Kaps?

SIMON. My employer--doesn't do the caulking himself. [To Kaps, who
has advanced to the gate.] Didn't I warn him?--wasn't you there?

KAPS. [Looking anxiously at Bos.] No, I wasn't there, and even if I
was, I didn't hear anything.

BOS. [To Clementine.] And now, you! Did that drunken sot----

CLEMENTINE. [Almost crying with anxiety.] Papa!

BOS. [Threatening.] As my daughter do you permit----[Grimly.] Answer
me!

CLEMENTINE. [Anxiously.] I don't remember----

SIMON. That's low--that's low--damned low! I said, the ship was
rotten--rotten----

BOS. A drunken man's stories. You're trying to drag in my bookkeeper
and daughter, and you hear----

COB. Yes, but--yes, but--now I remember also----

BOS. By thunder! you warned us too, eh?

COB. No, no, that would be lying. But your daughter--your daughter
says now that she hadn't heard the ship was rotten. And on the second
night of the storm, when she was alone with me at my sister Kneirtje's,
she did say that--that----

CLEMENTINE. [Trembling.] Did I--say----

COB. Yes, that you did! That very evening. These are my own words
to you: "Now you are fibbing, Miss; for if your father knew the Good
Hope was rotten"----

JO. [Springing up wildly, speaking with piercing distinctness.] You,
you lie! You began to cry. You were afraid ships would be lost. I
was there, and Truus was there, and----Oh, you adders!

BOS. [Banging his desk with his fist.] Adders? Adders? You scum! Who
gives you your feed, year in, year out? Haven't you decency enough to
believe us instead of that drunken beggar who reels as he stands there?

JO. [Raving with anger.] Believe you? You! She lies and you lie!

BOS. [Threatening.] Get out of my office!

JO. You had Barend dragged on board by the police; Geert was too
proud to be taken! Thief! thief! [Overwrought, hysterical laugh.] No,
no, you needn't point to your door! We are going. If I staid here
any longer I would spit in your face--spit in your face! [Makes
threatening gesture.]

COB. [Restraining her.] Come--come----

BOS. [After a silence.] For your Aunt's sake I will consider that you
are overwrought; otherwise--otherwise----The Good Hope was seaworthy,
was seaworthy! Have I no loss? Even if the ship was insured? And even
had the fellow warned me--which is a lie, could I, a business man,
take the word of a drunkard who can no longer get a job because he
is unable to handle tools?

SIMON. [Stammering.] I--I told you and him and her--that a floating
coffin like that. That stands fast!

JO. [Bursting out.] Oh! oh! Geert and Barend and Mees and the
others! Oh God, how could you allow it! [Sinks on the chair
sobbing.] Give me the money to go to Nieuwediep myself, then I won't
speak of it any more.

BOS. [Vindictively.] No! Not a red cent! A girl that talks to me as
rudely as you did----

JO. [Confused, crying.] I don't know what I said--and--and--I don't
believe that you--that you--that you would be worse than the devil.

BOS. The water-bailiff says that it isn't necessary to send any one
to Nieuwediep.

JO. [Staggering to the door.] Not necessary! Not necessary! What will
become of me now?----

[Cobus and Simon follow her out.]

[Bos walks back and forth. Kaps creeps up on his stool.]

BOS. [To Clementine.] And you--don't you ever dare to set foot again
in my office.

CLEMENTINE. [With a terrified look.] No, never again. [A long
pause.] Father, I ask myself [Bursts into sobs.] how I can ever again
respect you? Ever again respect myself? [Exits.]

BOS. Crazy! She would be capable of ruining my good name--with
her boarding-school whims. Who ever comes now you send away,
understand? Trash! Rabble! That whole set are no good! That damned
drunkard! That fellow that stinks of gin! [Sound of Jelle's fiddle
outside.] That too? [At the window.] Go on! No, not a cent! [The
music stops.] I am simply worn out. [Falls into his chair, takes
up Clementine's sketch book; spitefully turns the leaves; throws
it on the floor; stoops, jerks out a couple of leaves, tears them
up. Sits in thought a moment, then rings the telephone.] Hello! with
Dirksen--Dirksen, I say, the underwriter! [Waits, looking
sombre.] Hello! Are you there, Dirksen? It's all up with the
Good Hope. A hatch with my mark washed ashore and the body of a
sailor. [Changing to quarrelsome tone.] What do you say? I should
say not! No question of it! Sixty-two days! The probabilities are too
small. [Calmer.] Good! I shall wait for you here at my office. But be
quick about it! Yes, fourteen hundred guilders. Bejour. [Rings off;
at the last words Kneirtje has entered.]

KNEIRTJE. [Absently.] I----[She sinks on the bench, patiently weeping.]

BOS. [At the safe, without seeing her.] Have you mislaid the
policies? You never put a damn thing in its place.

KAPS. [Pointing from his stool.] The policies are higher, behind
the stocks.

BOS. [Snappishly.] All right, shut your mouth, now! [Turning around
with the policies in his hand.] Why don't you knock?

KNEIRTJE. I wanted to----

BOS. [Peevishly.] You've come five minutes too late. That hussy that
lives with you has been in here kicking up such a scandal that I came
near telephoning for the police. [Crossly.] Come in. Close the gate
after you.

KNEIRTJE. [Speaking with difficulty.] Is it true--is it true
that----The priest said----[Bos nods with a sombre expression.] Oh,
oh----[She stares helplessly, her arms hang limp.]

BOS. I have sympathy for you. I know you as a respectable woman--and
your husband too. But your children! I'm sorry to have to say it to you
now after such a blow, your children and that niece of yours have never
been any good. [Kneirtje's head sinks down.] How many years haven't
we had you around, until your son Geert threatened me with his fists,
mocked my grey hairs, and all but threw me out of your house--and your
other son----[Frightened.] Kneirtje! Kneirtje! [Rising.] Kaps! Water!
[Bathing her forehead and wrists.] I'll be damned! I'll be damned!

KAPS. Shall I call Mevrouw or your daughter?

BOS. No! Stay here! she's coming to. [Kneir. with long drawn out sobs,
sits looking before her with a dazed stare.]

KAPS. Kneir----

BOS. Keep still! Let her have her cry.

KNEIRTJE. [In an agonized voice, broken with sobs.] He didn't want
to go! He didn't want to go! And with my own hands I loosened his
fingers from the door post. [Moans softly.]

BOS. [In a muffled voice.] You have no cause to reproach yourself----

KNEIRTJE. [In the same voice as before.] Before he went I hung his
father's rings in his ears. Like--like a lamb to the slaughter----

BOS. Come----

KNEIRTJE. [Panting.] And my oldest boy that I didn't bid good
bye----"If you're too late"--these were his words--"I'll never look
at you again."--"Never look at you again!"

BOS. [Strongly moved.] Stop! in God's name, stop!----

KNEIRTJE. Twelve years ago--when the Clementine--I sat here as I am
now. [Sobs with her face between her trembling old hands.]

BOS. Come now, be strong.

[Mathilde enters.]

MATHILDE. Clemens! Ach, poor, dear Kneir, I am so sorry for you. It's
dreadful! It is frightful! Two sons!

KNEIRTJE. [Staring.] My husband and four sons----

MATHILDE. [Consoling.] But don't you worry. We have written an
appeal, the Burgomaster's wife and I, and it's going to be in all
the papers tomorrow. Here, Kaps----[Hands Kaps a sheet of paper which
he places on desk--Bos motions to her to go.] Let her wait a while,
Clemens. [Sweetly.] I have a couple of cold chops--that will brace
her up--and--and--let's make up with her. You have no objections
to her coming again to do the cleaning? We won't forget you, do you
hear? Good day, Kneir. Be brave. [Exits.]

BOS. No, we will not forget you.

KNEIRTJE. Now, my only hope is--my niece's child.

BOS. [Surprised.] A child?

KNEIRTJE. That misfortune is added. She is with child by my
son----[Softly smiling.] Misfortune? No, that isn't a misfortune
now----

BOS. And you sit and tell that? This immorality under your own
roof? Don't you know the rules of the fund, that no aid can be
extended to anyone leading an immoral life, or whose conduct does
not meet with our approval?

KNEIRTJE. [Submissive voice.] I leave it to the gentlemen
themselves--to do for me--the gentlemen----

BOS. It will be a tussle with the Committee--the committee of the
fund--your son had been in prison and sang revolutionary songs. And
your niece who----However, I will do my best. I shall recommend
you, but I can't promise anything. There are seven new families,
awaiting aid, sixteen new orphans. [Rising and closing the safe.] No,
sit awhile longer. My wife wants to give you something to take home
with you. [Exits.]

MATHILDE. [Invisible.] Kaps! Kaps! [The bookkeeper rises, disappears
for a moment, and returns with a dish and an enamelled pan.]

KAPS. [Kindly.] If you will return the dish when it's convenient,
and if you'll come again Saturday, to do the cleaning. [She stares
vacantly. He closes her nerveless hands about the dish and pan;
shuffles back to his stool. A silence. Kneirtje sits motionless,
in dazed agony; mumbles--moves her lips--rises with difficulty,
stumbles out of the office.]

KAPS. [Taking up sheet of paper from desk.] Appeal, for the
newspapers! [Smiling sardonically, he comes to the foreground; leaning
on Bos's desk, he reads.] "Benevolent Fellow Countrymen: Again we
urge upon your generosity an appeal in behalf of a number of destitute
widows and orphans. The lugger Good Hope----[As he continues reading.]


                                CURTAIN.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Good Hope, by Herman Heijermans, Jr.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOOD HOPE ***

***** This file should be named 58473-8.txt or 58473-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/4/7/58473/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
 are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Carpets, by Reginald Seymore Brinton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Carpets

Author: Reginald Seymore Brinton

Release Date: December 13, 2018 [EBook #58469]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARPETS ***




Produced by Mardi Desjardins & the online Distributed
Proofreaders Canada team at https://www.pgdpcanada.net





[Illustration: BRITISH FINE WILTON CARPET
After the Ardebit carpet (Victoria and Albert Museum).
  _Frontispiece_]




              PITMAN’S COMMON COMMODITIES AND INDUSTRIES


                                CARPETS


                                   BY
                             R. S. BRINTON


                                 LONDON
          SIR ISAAC PITMAN & SONS, LTD., 1 AMEN CORNER, E.C.4
                      BATH, MELBOURNE AND NEW YORK




                                PREFACE.


IN treating of carpet manufacture, which involves the employment of
looms and other machinery of a complicated nature, I was confronted with
the problem, how far it was necessary or desirable to explain and
illustrate mechanical devices. Upon consideration, it seemed advisable,
having regard to the scope of the book, to avoid as far as possible both
descriptions and diagrams of a mechanical nature. A certain standard of
mechanical intelligence is assumed in the reader; but this work, like
the rest of the series, is intended for the layman; and it is impossible
to describe and explain detailed mechanical movements except at
considerable length and with the aid of elaborate diagrams. Those who
wish to study the technique of the subject in detail are referred to Mr.
Fred Bradbury’s book, _Carpet Manufacture_ (F. King & Sons, Ltd.,
Halifax, 1904), which, though it has not been brought up to date, is a
classic for the trade, as all experts are aware. I am indebted to him
for the use of several blocks.

I have also to acknowledge the courtesy of the Gresham Publishing Co.,
Ltd., of Chandos Street, Covent Garden, for permission to use a number
of blocks from their _Textile Industries_, which contains some admirable
chapters on Carpet Manufacture.

My thanks are further due to _The Times_ for permission to utilise some
contributions I made to their “Textile Supplement,” published in 1913;
while I have received information and helpful criticism from Messrs.
Woodward, Grosvenor & Co., Ltd., Messrs. T. & A. Naylor, Ltd., The
Victoria Carpet Co., not to mention colleagues and foremen of my own
Company, Brintons Limited.

For the historical chapter I am indebted to Mr. A. C. Parry, and for
particulars of Carpet Trades Unions to Mr. E. Stradling, Mr. Ellis
Crowther, and Mr. T. Lindsay.

I am conscious of the possibility of errors and omissions, and I should
be grateful for any intimation of such, with the view of making the
necessary corrections, if a further edition should be required.

                                                        R. S. BRINTON.

 CROFT HOUSE,
  KIDDERMINSTER,
   1919.




                                CONTENTS

               CHAP.                                  PAGE
                     PREFACE                           iii
                  I. HISTORY                             1
                 II. MATERIALS                           9
                III. DYEING                             13
                 IV. HAND-MADE CARPETS                  20
                  V. BRUSSELS CARPETS                   29
                 VI. WILTON CARPETS                     44
                VII. AXMINSTER CARPETS                  49
               VIII. CHENILLE CARPETS                   63
                 IX. TAPESTRY CARPETS                   71
                  X. INGRAIN CARPETS                    86
                 XI. DESIGN AND COLOUR                  92
                XII. STATISTICS                        104
               XIII. EMPLOYERS AND EMPLOYED            107
                XIV. CONCLUSION                        119
                     INDEX                             123




                             ILLUSTRATIONS

      FIG.                                              PAGE
           BRITISH FINE WILTON CARPET              _Frontispiece_

        1. TURKISH, KNOT                                 21
        2. LONGITUDINAL SECTION THROUGH HEALDS,          33
             HARNESS, SLEY, AND FABRIC
        3. SECTION OF FIVE-FRAME BRUSSELS CARPET         35
        4. SECTION OF THREE-FRAME BRUSSELS CARPET        36
        5. AND 5A. CHLIDEMA SQUARE                       41
        6. SECTION OF FIVE-FRAME WILTON                  45
        7. SECTION OF IMPERIAL AXMINSTER—3-SHOT          51
        8. SECTION OF AXMINSTER—3-SHOT                   52
        9. SECTIONS OF AXMINSTER WEAVES                  53
       10. TUFTING MECHANISM                             55
       11. CHENILLE DESIGN PAPER CUT UP                  64
       12. CHENILLE CLOTH                                65
       13. TRANSVERSE SECTION SHOWING FUR INSERTED       65
       14. SECTION OF CHENILLE AXMINSTER                 67
       15. DESIGN OF TAPESTRY CARPET                     72
       16. DESIGN IN FIG. 15 ELONGATED AS PRINTED        73
       17. PRINTING DRUM                                 76
       18. SCALE AND DESIGN BOARD COMBINED               78
       19. A SCRAPER                                     80
       20. PRINTED THREADS SET FOR WINDING ON TO         81
             THE BEAM
       21. FIG. 20 AS WOVEN                              82
       22. STRUCTURE OF TAPESTRY CARPET                  82
       23. MEDIUM TAPESTRY CARPET                        83
       24. TAPESTRY VELVET—3-SHOT                        83
       25. TAPESTRY VELVET                               84
       26. TAPESTRY VELVET—2 SHOTS IN THE GROUND         84
       27. TWO-PLY IN WARP AND WEFT                      86
       28. TWO-PLY WARP AND WEFT                         88
       29. THREE-PLY WARP AND TWO-PLY WEFT               88
       30. THREE-PLY WARP AND WEFT                       89




                                CARPETS




                               CHAPTER I
                                HISTORY


BEFORE the mechanical processes involved in the manufacture of carpets
to-day are described, a short sketch of the history of the fabric and
the story of its introduction into this country may be of interest. The
origin of the weaver’s loom, like that of the potter’s wheel, dates back
to the prehistoric times. A loom with its workers is shown in an ancient
Egyptian fresco, the date of which is reckoned by antiquarians to be
about 3,000 years before the Christian Era. In the grottoes of
Benihassan, both spinners and weavers are shown, the weavers working on
cloths both plain and of a checked pattern; and both perpendicular and
horizontal looms are represented. There were, however, other
civilisations beside the Egyptian; and the origin of the carpet must be
sought still further to the East, in places where, in spite of the ebb
and flow of conquests, it is still made at the present day.

Mention is frequently found in ancient records of history of rich
hangings, coverings, fine cloths and tapestries, generally the booty of
some conqueror; but it is difficult to tell whether some fabric used
exclusively as the carpet of to-day is used is included in these lists.
The ancient equivalent of the modern carpet or rug was known to the
Babylonians, who were, according to Pliny, skilful weavers; and its
manufacture was carried on at an early date among the Assyrians and
Persians, in China and India, and among the Arabs.

The original purpose of the carpet in the East was probably the same in
the beginning as it is there, now, at the present day. It was used to
give colour to the temple, as a hanging for the tents, a trapping for
the saddle, a sitting place for the guest, for a covering of the ground
on which to sleep or pray; and its manufacture in any district implied a
certain degree of civilisation and luxury.

The use of a woven floor-covering seems to be indicated in passages in
Homer; and the well-known authority, Sir George Birdwood, cites an
account of a banquet given at Alexandria in the third century before the
Christian Era by Ptolemy Philadelphus, at which Persian rugs were spread
in the King’s tent. Persian carpets were highly valued, and were
exported to Greece, and at a later date to Rome. Themistocles, according
to Plutarch, “likened a man’s discourse to a rich Persian carpet, the
beautiful figures and patterns of which can be shown only by spreading
and extending it out; when it is contracted and folded up, they are
obscured and lost.”

The conquests of Alexander the Great, which extended as far as India,
seem to have made the use of the products of the Eastern looms familiar
among the Greeks. At a later date the conquests made by the Roman
Consuls spread the arts of the East still further into Europe. At a
later period still the taking of Constantinople by the Turks drove many
skilful artificers to take up their residence in Italy at Venice, Genoa,
and Florence, and at some towns in France; and from these centres
carpets were still further distributed over Europe.

The Crusades brought England into touch with the East; and specimens of
carpet were probably introduced by returning knights and their
followers; but it is through Spain, a country which acquired the art
from the Moors, that they are first known to have come, Queen Eleanor of
Castille and her suite introducing them into this country on her
marriage to Edward I. Illustrations of carpets are shown in pictures of
the time of Henry VIII; and in the time of Elizabeth they were probably
in more general use in England than most writers on the subject are
accustomed to allow; for direct communication with the East had been
opened up by the fearless and enterprising traders and adventurers of
those times. In Hakluyt’s _Voyages_ there are the following instructions
to a trader about to journey to Persia—

“In Persia you shall finde carpets of course thrummed wooll, the best of
the world, and excellently coloured; those cities and townes you most
repaire to, and you must use meanes to learne all the order of the dying
of those thrummes, which are so died as neither raine, wine, nor yet
vinegar can staine; and if you may attaine to that cunning you shall not
need to feare dying of clothe. For if the colour holde in yarne and
thrumme, it will holde much better in cloth. Learne you there to fixe
and make sure the colour to be given by logge wood; so shall we not need
to buy wood so deare to the enriching of our enemies. Enquire the price
of leckar, and all other things belonging to dying. If before you
returne you could procure a single good workeman in the arte of Turkish
carpet making you should bringe the arte into this Realme, and also
thereby increase worke to your company.”

Hakluyt’s praise of the Persian carpets was not undeserved, for their
manufacture in his time had reached a period of excellence as regards
design and workmanship which it has been from time to time the aim of
modern manufacturers to reproduce, as far as the conditions and
requirements of the present day permit. Many of the best specimens in
the museums and collections of New York, London, Vienna, and Paris are
attributed to the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. When Hakluyt wrote
there was in existence a carpet at the Mosque of Ardebil, in North-West
Persia, which is now in the Victoria and Albert Museum. The date of this
carpet is 1540, and experts agree that it belongs to the best period of
Persian carpet weaving.

There is, unfortunately, no record whether the efforts of Hakluyt and
the merchant adventurers of his time to obtain weavers from Turkey or
Persia were successful. Carpets do not find a place among the goods to
be especially sought after by their agents. As far back as the reign of
Henry VIII we read of Cardinal Wolsey obtaining carpets through the
Venetian Ambassador; and in that reign Richard Sheldon lent his house to
a weaver named Richard Hicks, who produced among other fabrics woven
maps of Worcestershire and Oxfordshire, specimens of which are still in
existence.

In France, Henry IV gave assistance for the manufacture of carpets, and
in 1604 there was a strong guild of carpet weavers; but it was not until
the reign of Louis XIV that the manufacture was revived at Aubusson and
established at Beauvais. The industry had the direct patronage of the
French King, and some celebrated fabrics were made. The Revocation, in
1685, of the Edict of Nantes, which for a time had given protection to
the Protestants of France, drove a large number of French and Walloon
artisans into England and Germany; and the spinning and weaving were
among the many industries in this country to be benefited by this influx
of skilful workers.

In 1701 the carpet weavers of Wilton and Axminster received a charter;
but even at an earlier date the manufacture of carpets had been carried
on at these places. Both these towns have given their names to distinct
fabrics that are now made in many places and countries. Carpet
manufacture is no longer carried on at Axminster, where it flourished
for about a century; and other places, like Fulham, Moorfields, Exeter,
and Frome, where early attempts were made to establish the industry,
have long ceased to have any connection with carpet making.

About the year 1740, the Earl of Pembroke brought over weavers from
France and introduced into Wilton the making of loop-pile or Brussels
carpeting. This was followed in due course by the development of the
cut-pile fabric which took its name from the place.

About the year 1736 the weaving of carpets seems to have been
established at Kidderminster, a town which had been connected with the
weaving of broadcloth and “flowered stuff” from as far back as the reign
of Henry VIII. When the art was first introduced, what is now called
Scotch or Kidderminster carpet was made on the old hand-loom; the
process of weaving was slow and laborious, and required a man and a boy
to each loom. In 1745, Mr. Broom started the manufacture of Wilton and
Brussels carpets in the town, bringing over weavers from Tournai. In
1772 the number of carpet looms in the town was 250, and the trade
extended to other places in the North of England and Scotland. In 1830
there were nearly 1,100 looms in Kidderminster, and a considerable home
and foreign trade had been established. A Parliamentary Paper of that
date gave the consumption of wool in the weaving of carpets as one
twenty-eighth of the whole quantity of wool produced in the Kingdom.

In 1757, Mr. Thomas Moore started the manufacture of carpets in London,
and obtained a premium from the Society of Arts for the best imitation
of Turkey carpets.

As far back as 1778 there was a trade to some extent at Kilmarnock. The
original fabric was the two-ply Scotch or Kidderminster carpet. In 1824,
an engineer of Kilmarnock introduced the three-ply Scotch carpet, a
fabric of three layers of different colours, each of which is brought to
the surface according to design; while about the same time Brussels and
Velvet pile were also introduced into Scotland. In 1831, the Trustees
for Manufactures in Scotland awarded the prize for four Turkey carpets,
the first of that type made in Scotland.

In the last quarter of the eighteenth century the inventions of
Arkwright had been applied to the woollen and worsted industries.
Boulton and Watts had put their steam engine on a practical footing,
while Cartwright had made a power-loom for the weaving of calico, and
had also patented a wool-combing machine. In France, Jacquard was
perfecting a device which, when adapted to the carpet loom, was to play
an important part in the development of the industry.

From the beginning of the nineteenth century, progress, in spite of
occasional checks due to general economic conditions, was well
maintained; and by the year 1825 the Jacquard mechanism was beginning to
replace, both in England and Scotland, the old and complicated harness
of the hand-loom. A great increase of trade followed its adoption.

Two other important inventions, which had a great influence in extending
the scope of the trade, were developed in the thirties of the last
century. The one was the development of the tapestry process of printing
and weaving carpets by Mr. Whytock, of Edinburgh and Glasgow. This
process enabled a greater range of colours to be used than was
previously possible, and also allowed a cheaper fabric to be produced.
After initial opposition, the process was developed in Scotland; and
finally, about the year 1842, Halifax became the centre of the Tapestry
weaving. Firms in other towns were licensed, and the process was so
widely taken up that in 1850 there were 1,299 Tapestry hand-looms at
work in England and Scotland, as against 2,500 hand Brussels looms. The
other notable invention was that of Mr. James Templeton, of Glasgow, who
in 1839 patented a novel device for the manufacture of patent Axminster
carpets by a two-fold process. This also admitted of a large range of
shades. The invention has since been considerably developed, and has
contributed largely to the extension of the carpet industry.

From small beginnings, early in the nineteenth century the manufacture
of carpets had grown in the course of 50 years to an important industry
in the United States, and was well established in Philadelphia and other
centres. Both in England and America the most able inventors had turned
their attention to the problem of weaving by power. Mr. Collier, who had
been successful in weaving linen by power, produced, in conjunction with
Messrs. Crossley, of Halifax, a loom for the weaving of Tapestry and
Brussels. The problem had, however, been solved by Mr. E. P. Bigelow, in
America, and the Bigelow patent was acquired by Messrs. Crossley. The
introduction of the power-loom created a great change in the industry.
The transition period from hand-weaving to power-weaving was a period of
anxiety to manufacturers and of privation to the old hand-loom weavers;
but the situation was everywhere faced, and from the first introduction
of power-loom weaving ever-increasing quantities of carpets have been
woven, both for home consumption and for export. In the seventies of the
last century another step forward was the remarkable invention of the
Moquette or Royal Axminster loom by Alexander Smith & Sons, of Yonkers,
N.Y. This loom was introduced to England by Messrs. Tomkinson & Adam, of
Kidderminster; and the invention has caused a still further extension of
the carpet trade both at home and abroad.




                               CHAPTER II
                               MATERIALS


CARPET manufacture is a complicated matter, and involves the use both of
various ingenious machines and of a diversity of materials, such as
wool, cotton, jute, twine, oil, paper, wire, colours, size, etc. We need
only concern ourselves, however, with the more important of these
materials, which are yarns made of wool, in the form of worsted or
woollen, which are almost invariably used for the surface of a carpet;
and yarns made of other fibres, which are used for warp and weft.

The wool used for carpet yarns is different from that required for
either cloth or hosiery. It need not be so fine and soft, but it should
be strong, and in the case of worsted yarn, of fairly long staple, while
natural lustre adds to the value.

A recent estimate of the sources of wool consumed by the carpet trade
allotted 9 per cent. to the British Empire, as much as 40 per cent. to
Russia, and the remainder to other countries. Strong British wools, and
the coarser stapled fibres from Australia and New Zealand, form the bulk
of the first category, while Egyptian and East Indian wools, which are
in especial demand for woollen yarns, are responsible for a large
proportion of the last.

Of other materials that can be and are used for the surface of carpets,
mention should first be made of silk. Hand-tufted carpets are sometimes
made of silk both in Asia and in Europe, and beautiful effects are
obtained; but the cost on the one hand, and the nature of the yarn on
the other militate against its being a very suitable material for a
floor covering. Carpets made with a silk pile possess a wonderful sheen,
especially if hand-woven, so that the tufts lie over at a considerable
angle; but the pile possesses no resilience and suffers more from
soiling in wear than a wool-pile carpet of a corresponding quality.

Mohair is used occasionally for hand-tufted carpets with excellent
effect, and it is often employed to great advantage in self-coloured
hearth rugs, for which there is a regular demand. The extreme stiffness
of the fibre and its disinclination to felt, however, cause the yarn to
be a rather intractable material for carpet manufacture. It possesses,
moreover, the special characteristic of considerable density. In other
words, it is heavy for its volume, so that a yarn of a given thickness
will weigh much more than a similar yarn of another fibre, with the
result that all mohair fabrics are expensive compared with those made of
wool or other yarns.

Jute is employed for the surface as well as for the rest of the carpet
at Dundee; and horse-hair Brussels carpets are made, which are extremely
durable, but somewhat harsh, and not very decorative. Yarn spun from
cow-hair is utilised sometimes for the surface of carpets of the
Brussels or Dutch type, but perhaps more often for filling warps; while
cotton has been tried for the former purpose also, but without very
satisfactory results, owing to the lack of resilience in its fibre.

If to the cobbler there is nothing like leather, so to the carpet
manufacturer there is nothing like wool. Yarn made of wool seems to be
the ideal material for the surface of a carpet. Wool is capable of being
spun easily into yarn of any required count or thickness; and such yarn
can be dyed to any shade, and woven into any fabric. When woven, it will
retain its appearance and stand reasonably hard wear better than most
similar textile materials. Its liability to the attacks of moths may be
urged; but, after all, carpets are made as much for use as for ornament,
and it is well known that the clothes moth only works when he is
undisturbed.

Of subsidiary yarns, perhaps cotton is the most important. This is used
for a large proportion of the chain warps of all kinds of carpeting. It
is also occasionally used for weft, and in its lowest qualities for
stuffers.

Flax yarn, more generally known in the trade as linen, is used in
considerable quantities, especially as chains for Axminster, and as weft
for Wilton and Brussels carpets. Its combined strength and pliancy,
coupled with a certain degree of stiffness, make it a most useful fibre.
Jute and hemp, having regard to the total production of all kinds of
carpet, are probably used in greater quantities than any other yarn.
Jute is cheap and strong, and is invaluable as a filling to give weight
and handle to a fabric. It has the disadvantage of being liable to decay
if it becomes wet, and in this state, if used in too large a proportion,
of causing the disintegration of a carpet.

Of other materials that are sometimes used for the backing of carpets,
mention must be made of ramie, which has been tried as a substitute for
linen yarn, which it resembles a good deal in character, being strong
and pliant, but inelastic. The cost, however, has proved to be
prohibitive. Various mixtures of jute and wool, or of cotton and wool,
have been tried, and have their values as combining weight with
resilience.

Paper yarn, though seldom as a matter of fact under its own name, has
been tried as a substitute for linen, cotton, and jute, as weft, chain,
and stuffer. It can be spun or twisted into a presentable yarn in a
variety of counts; and a yarn that will weave and weave well. During the
war, owing to their shortage of other fibres, the Germans used
considerable quantities of paper yarn for weaving cloths, webbing,
harness, equipment, and even carpets, which no doubt served their
purposes tolerably well. It was, however, a development pursued rather
from necessity than from choice. They had plenty of wood, which we have
not; and they lacked the wool, cotton, and jute. Paper yarn cannot
seriously compete in price with jute, nor in value with cotton, for use
in carpets. It is, moreover, particularly liable to deterioration from
dampness.




                              CHAPTER III
                                 DYEING


ALL worsted and woollen yarns used for the surface of carpets, with the
exception of those whereon the colours are printed, as in Tapestry
carpets, are dyed; and fast and accurate dyeing is of cardinal
importance in carpet manufacture.

Practically all worsted yarns, and some woollen yarns, however, are
supplied to carpet manufacturers by the spinners in oil or in grease;
that is to say, still impregnated with the oil which has been put into
them in the process of spinning. The freeing of the yarn from this oil
by washing is a necessary preliminary to dyeing, inasmuch as the
presence of oil would prevent the dye liquor permeating the wool fibres.

Scouring is effected by soap and hot water, generally by machines of one
type or another. The yarn in skeins is sometimes thrown upon swifts,
which revolve over a vat of suds. The skeins are carried through the
liquor and well rinsed by the rotation of the swifts. Another method
employed is to pass the skeins, tied together in a long chain, through
vats in which they are steeped in the suds, and through rollers which
squeeze them more or less dry. Or the skeins may travel along a series
of aprons, underneath a shower, between rollers, or through bowls of
suds. The precise method adopted is not of great importance provided
that the scouring solution has full opportunity to operate upon the wool
fibres, so that the yarn is delivered ultimately free of oil and of
soap. For this reason, a final bath of pure water is desirable.

The solvents principally used are ammonia, alkali, and an alkaline soap
of some kind. Cotton-seed oil soap is generally regarded as one of the
most suitable.

The scoured yarn is now ready for dyeing, and passes, without being
fully dried, to the sticks or frames of the hand-vat or dyeing machine.

The three main considerations to be kept in view in the dyeing of
worsted and woollen yarns for carpets are levelness of colour, accuracy
of matching, and fastness of colour to light. The second and third are
matters which concern the skill of the head dyer and the quality of the
dyestuffs which he employs; the first depends upon the handling of the
yarn by the operative in the hand vat or dyeing machine; and the
essential factor, apart from the proper temperature of the dye-liquor,
is motion.

Dyeing by hand, although superseded almost entirely by machine-dyeing,
is still employed in some cases, particularly where only small
quantities are required. The dye-vat is of wood, and should be a
well-made piece of joinery to withstand the wear and tear incidental to
its use. Round the bottom on the inside is fitted a tube of copper or
some acid-resisting metal, perforated with small holes, through which
steam is passed to heat up the water. The head dyer weighs out the
dyestuffs estimated to produce a shade a fraction below the required
shade, so as to admit of final adjustment after testing. This, of
course, applies equally to hand or machine-dyeing. For hand vats, the
skeins of scoured yarn are hung on a set of poles, which, when filled,
are placed on brackets above the vat. When the dyestuff has been put in,
and the water brought to the required temperature, a pair of workmen,
each holding one end of the poles, standing on each side, sets them on
the edge of the vat and lets the free ends of the skeins sink down into
the liquor. When all the poles are in place, the operators start on the
pole at one end, and, raising each skein in turn, draw it over a few
inches, so that the part which has hitherto remained outside the liquor
is now immersed. When the skeins on one stick are finished, that stick
is pushed a little way along and the next is treated similarly. When the
whole set is done, the operation is repeated. The essence of the
treatment is to keep the yarn moving. If the skeins were allowed to
remain in the same place, even after the first moving, there would be
“stick marks” at the point where the skein rested on the pole, because
the liquor would not have had as much access to this place as to the
rest of the skeins.

After an hour or so, or when sufficient time has been allowed for the
dyestuffs to permeate the yarn fibres, the poles are lifted on to the
brackets, and a skein is taken out and submitted to the head dyer for
matching. The head dyer will compare it with his standard, and, in the
case of dyeing to match a cut-pile or tufted fabric such as Wilton or
Axminster, he will probably make a tuft from a thread of the sample
skein, so as to compare the shade of the cut ends as well as of the
outside of the thread. He will then make the necessary corrections or
additions to the dye-bath if the exact shade has not been reached, and
the operation will be continued until he is satisfied. The poles are
then finally lifted, removed from above the vat to a horse; the yarn is
then stripped from the poles and passed to the hydro-extractor prior to
going on to the stove or drying machine.

The object of dyeing machines, of course, is to effect the same
treatment of the yarn as is done by hand as just described, but in a
more expeditious way. A machine can, in fact, do nearly twice as much as
a man, and in a more regular manner. That is to say, one man can mind a
machine of the same capacity as a hand vat which requires two men; but
it is desirable, if not, indeed, necessary, that he should have
assistance in loading and unloading.

Given the necessity for keeping the yarn in motion while immersed in the
dye liquor, the problem of the designer of dye machines has been to find
the most simple and effective way of doing this, keeping in view the
need for convenience in preparing the yarn for the bath, dropping it in,
and removing it.

Dyeing machines are of two main types: those which move the yarn through
the liquor, and those which move the liquor through the yarn. Each type
has in common a frame of some kind to carry the dye-sticks on which the
yarn is hung; and practically every type of frame is provided with
sticks to support the skeins at one or both ends. Of the former and
earlier type the movement of the frame carrying the yarn in the liquor
may be effected in various ways. The frame in one machine is revolved in
the vat upon a circular axis; in another the revolution is combined with
a rocking motion; in a third a vertical movement is obtained by means of
a hydraulic pump fitted with an automatic reversing mechanism. In each
case the problem of moving the yarn in the liquor is complicated by the
minor problems of moving the yarn on the sticks so as to avoid stick
marks, and of raising and lowering the frame, or of stripping it in
position, if irremovable. The former is solved by some worm or ratchet
contrivance for automatically turning the dye-sticks, and the latter by
cranes or tackle, or, as in one of the makes just mentioned, by a
hydraulic pump.

All the machines of this main type have their advantages and
disadvantages, as they have their supporters and critics; but there can
be little doubt that the balance of opinion among carpet yarn dyers is
growing preponderatingly towards the second type of machine; that in
which the liquor is moved through the yarn. In this type, the frame
carrying the yarn is dropped into the vat, which is then covered with a
lid. The liquor is then caused to circulate in a strong stream
throughout the vat by propellers fixed at the head. The motion of the
propellers can be reversed if desired. If both top and bottom sticks are
used in the frame, they are placed at a less distance apart than the
length of the skein, so that, the skein being completely immersed, the
yarn is carried free of the stick by the flow of the liquor, access is
given to all the wool fibres, and the danger of stick marks is avoided.
The chief merit of this machine, however, is the considerable economy
that is effected in steam consumption by the reduced size of the vat, as
well as by the lid. The vat need only be made just large enough to
contain the skeins dropped into it, whereas in the other type of machine
it must be made large enough to allow for the skeins to be moved about
in it. There is, therefore, less water to be heated for a given weight
of yarn. The lid avoids loss of heat by radiation, which is inevitable
with the open top types.

The chemistry and the science of dyeing worsted and woollen yarns is a
subject that can only be dealt with adequately at considerable length.
Here a brief reference must suffice.

Wool fibre is a substance similar in nature to horn, with a scaly
surface. It is hygroscopic, being capable of taking up a large amount of
water compared to its own bulk, and when moistened and heated it tends
to soften and swell. These characteristics make wool very susceptible of
being dyed. It is said to have an affinity for certain colouring
matters, but this phrase serves to cover a want of agreement among
chemists, as to whether dyeing is actually of a chemical or a mechanical
nature. It is probably both. In any case, wool is easy to dye compared
with silk, cotton, or other fibres.

Natural dyestuffs, such as logwood, madder, fustic, cochineal, and
indigo, are practically obsolete so far as dyeing for carpet yarns is
concerned; and the modern dyer has a large range of aniline and
alizarine colours to choose from. As is pretty generally known, the
production of dyestuff from coal tar was originally a British invention,
but its development passed into the hands of the Germans, upon whom,
before the war, the dye consumers of the carpet trade, as of other
trades, were very largely dependent. Necessity and enterprise have
remedied this deplorable state of affairs, which need never recur. The
coal tar dyes now being produced by British dye manufacturers are
trustworthy and satisfactory, and they should improve both in quality
and quantity as time goes on.

For the purposes of the carpet yarn dyer, at any rate, the anilines and
alizarines now obtainable are infinitely preferable to any natural or
vegetable dyes, being easier to use, more reliable, and faster to light.

The ordinary method of preparing the dye-bath into which the worsted or
woollen yarn is to be dipped in the manner that has been described, is
as follows. The water, in which from 2 to 4 per cent. of sulphuric acid
and from 5 to 10 per cent. of Glauber’s Salts is mixed, is brought up to
about 170°F.; the dyestuff is added, about 1 to 5 per cent., according
to the depth of shade required. The percentages are reckoned upon the
weight of the yarn to be dyed. The yarn is then entered, and the water
is brought to the boil, and kept lightly boiling as long as required to
obtain the shade. There are some delicate shades, however, and some
sensitive dyestuffs, for which the yarn requires to be entered cool, and
the water to be brought slowly to the boil.

The dyed yarn passes from the vat to the hydro-extractor, a large copper
pan with perforated sides, which, revolving at a great speed, causes the
wet skeins by centrifugal force to press against the circumference and
squeeze out a large proportion of the water they contain. The skeins are
then taken out, bundled roughly together, and are ready for conveying to
the drying room or drying machine.

Drying the yarn can be effected simply by hanging the skeins on poles in
a room through which strong currents of air are forced by revolving
fans. This method, however, depends too much upon the weather, even if
the air is caused to pass over steam-heated coils on entering the room.
A better alternative is to expose the yarn hung on poles in a heated
chamber. The most certain and satisfactory method, however, is a drying
machine of some type, which enables the skeins to be fed into it at one
end, to pass through a current of heated air, and to be delivered dry at
the other. The factors in this case, the heat of the steam coils and the
speed of the machine, are known and can be controlled; so that the dyer
can rely upon getting a certain quantity of yarn satisfactorily dried in
a certain time. In the ordinary type of machine, the skeins are carried
horizontally between two wire aprons; but alternatively they can be
carried vertically upon hooks or poles.

The yarn, coloured and dried, is now ready to go to the yarn store, or
direct to the winding-room.




                               CHAPTER IV
                           HAND-MADE CARPETS


THE characteristic feature of a carpet, as distinguished from other
floor coverings, is the combination of a surface composed almost always
of wool with a woven foundation, which may be of various materials.

The main classification of carpets is between those which are made by
hand and those which are made by machine; and of both these classes
there are many sub-divisions.

Hand-made carpets are the oldest type of the fabric, and, coming from
the East, are the historical parents of all modern carpets. This kind of
carpet is made to-day in the United Kingdom, on the Continent, and in
the East in almost exactly the same manner in which it has been made by
the Orientals for several hundred years. The principle is extremely
simple. The warp threads, or chain, are wound on two horizontal beams,
between which they are stretched vertically. The beams are carried by
upright posts on which they can revolve, the space between the posts
determining the width of the rug or carpet. The weavers sit side by side
in front, the carpet as it is woven being gradually wound on to the
lower beam, and the warp correspondingly unwound from the upper beam.
The yarn for the pile is cut up into tufts about 2 in. in length, and is
knotted round two warp threads, tuft by tuft, according to the paper
design, which is attached in front of the weaver. As each row, or part
of a row is finished, two weft threads are put in, one in the shed
formed between the front and back halves of the chain, and a second in
an alternate shed, which is formed by the weaver pulling forward the
back half of the chain temporarily in front of the front half. The
second weft is put in straight, the first one loose, zig-zag, or
vandyked, so as to fill up the back of the carpet, and to avoid the
tendency towards lateral contraction. The weft is beaten down into its
place by a heavy fork or beater. This interlocking of warp and weft with
the tuft forms the weave of the carpet, and has been imitated more or
less in all mechanically woven carpet fabrics.

[Illustration: FIG. 1       TURKISH KNOT]

There are two different kinds of knot employed, the Ghiordes or Turkish,
and the Senne or Persian. In carpets made with the former, the tuft of
yarn is knotted round a pair of warp threads in such a manner that the
two ends of yarn come between the two warp threads round which the tuft
is looped, and consequently two pile ends alternate with every two warp
threads. In Persian carpets the tuft is knotted in such a way that one
end of the tuft obtrudes between each warp thread. This method of
weaving renders possible a closer texture than the Turkish knot; while
carpets of suitable design and finer pitch are often woven with a
running thread looped round the finger of the weaver, and then cut,
instead of by individual tufts. This latter system gives more waste but
quicker weaving. With both Turkish and Persian knots the tuft ends do
not stand up at right angles to the plane of the fabric, but lie over
obliquely towards the starting end of the carpet. This natural slant of
the pile, which results in presenting to the eye and the foot of the
user of the carpet partly the ends and partly the sides of tufts, is a
very characteristic feature of hand-made carpets, and one which cannot
be completely imitated by any class of machine-made fabrics.

Another kind of hand weaving is the tapestry method, wherein the weft
colours, wound upon wooden needles, are threaded round and between the
warp ends, leaving a flat or slightly ribbed surface, not unlike that of
an ingrain carpet. The absence of a tufted pile does not make this a
luxurious carpet; but it enables a fine pitch to be employed, and the
richest and most delicate effects of design and colour to be obtained.
Carpets of this type have long been made at Les Gobelins, Paris,
Aubusson, and Beauvais, in France, and Tournai, in Belgium. The work is
slow and highly skilled, and the product is naturally very expensive.

There is no better kind of carpet than the carpet made by hand; though
this is far from implying that all hand-tufted carpets are superior to
all machine-made ones. But there is no method of combining the pile with
the foundation so good as the knot; and it cannot be completely imitated
by the cleverest power-loom invented. The hand-tufted carpet possesses
an individuality, even in its faults, which no product of a machine can
attain, and which, after all, is an attribute to a work of art. More of
the soul of the worker has passed into it than the clashing metal of a
power loom will permit to filter into its product.

Hand-made carpets have a further advantage in their adaptability to
requirements. A single carpet, for instance, can be made to any
specified shape, size, design, colour, and quality. It is possible to
produce in one piece carpets of oval, circular, or L-shaped form, or to
conform to irregular curves and angles.

Qualities are numerous, but may be said to vary mainly between about 9
and 400 tufts to the square inch. The average European hand-made carpet
will not run to more than from 16 to 30.

As regards materials, the tuft yarn will vary from a heavy woollen for
coarse pitches to a fine worsted for the closer, while silk is
occasionally employed, producing a carpet of greater lustre, but less
resiliency.

The Eastern weavers are fond of using woollen of suitable counts for
both warp and weft, though a cotton warp is quite common. Flax or linen,
however, is more commonly employed by the European maker; and the
combination of strength and softness in this material seem to make it
almost ideal for the purpose.

European hand-tufted carpets may be considered as upon a different
footing from Asiatic. Indeed, the carpet dealer would hardly regard the
two—at any rate in pre-war days, would hardly _have_ regarded them—as
mutually competitive. The main localities for this branch of the
industry are Maffersdorf, in Austria, Holland, Donegal, Carlisle, and
Wilton. But, although in each of these places carpets of characteristic
Eastern design and colouring are produced, their staple trade has always
lain rather along the lines of specialities. They have catered rather
for architects, decorators, individuals, or public bodies, who were
inspired by some particular idea, and who could afford to pay for it,
than for the ordinary consumer. To make standard carpets for stock,
unless it were some crimson Yapraks, would be quite exceptional. The
reason for this, and the relation of European and Asiatic hand-made
carpets will be alluded to later.

At any rate the fact remains, that the European hand-tufted carpet
trade, though it has been responsible for some superb productions in a
variety of styles—and in this connection due credit must be given to
the enemy maker alluded to—yet it never attained a position of
importance adequate to its undoubted merits.

It is quite impossible to deal effectively in a limited space with so
large a subject as that of Oriental carpets and rugs. Books have been
written on the historical and artistic aspects alone. Some brief notes
must suffice. It is interesting to recall that the inhabitants of Persia
and Asia Minor, who were the earliest makers of carpets, were nomads.
They wove their tents, decorated with tribal signs and symbols, and they
wove the curtains or kelims for greater comfort and ornament. Rugs and
carpets followed in natural sequence. The primary object of these was to
cover the raised bank of earth at the end of the tent on which the chief
sat. Other rugs and mats were placed round the tent for the use of the
family or of visitors. Besides these, there were the prayer rugs for
their special purpose, which were carefully stored when not required for
use.

When the dwelling-place developed from a tent to a house, a raised seat
of honour covered by a rug took the place of the bank of earth; and
divans on each side of the room, for which long rugs or runners were
required, accommodated the family and callers.

Weaving was, and still is, largely a family affair, in the East. The
women and girls sit in front of the loom and work under the supervision
of the matriarch. Obviously the degrees of skill employed will vary; and
this leads to some of the irregularities in Eastern carpets, which,
however, are regarded rather as beauties than as blemishes by the
Western buyer.

It is not to be implied, however, that all Oriental carpets are still
the product of family or tribal industry. Western methods have
penetrated even into the “unchanging East”: organisation of the industry
has been set up; and carpet dealers and importers’ syndicates in New
York, London, and Paris have their agents in the East, and even control
their own factories, to which they send their orders. This may be
thought to detract from the romance of the Oriental carpet, but it does
not appear to have affected adversely the progress of the industry or
the merit of its products; and there is no reason why it should, so long
as the Western buyers are men of taste and experience, and do not seek
to impose uncongenial ideas upon the Eastern worker, which might tend to
the destruction of individuality and local feeling.

It is a common fallacy, that the yarns of Oriental carpets are dyed
solely with vegetable dyes, and that those dyes are intrinsically
superior to aniline and alizarine dyes, such as are employed for yarns
for machine-made fabrics. The latter have been used for many years now
by European carpet manufacturers, not because they are cheaper than
vegetable dyes, but because they are easier to use, more accurate for
matching purposes, and faster to light. There are, of course, good and
bad synthetic dyes, but the best are immeasurably superior to dyes made
from plants, barks, and berries. This fact has long been recognised by
those who control the production of Oriental carpets, for the yarns for
which aniline and alizarine dyes are now extensively employed.

The subject of dyeing naturally leads on to that of doctoring or
“faking,” which is commonly adopted with a large proportion of Eastern
carpets. The object is twofold: to soften the original brightness of the
colours, or to give an appearance of age; and to obtain a gloss which
the wool does not naturally possess. This is generally done by the
collectors or agents, and not by the people who weave the carpets. It is
often known by the innocent name of _washing_, and consists in treating
the surface with some chemical such as chlorine water, or glycerine,
followed by ironing with a hot iron. It can hardly be supposed that this
treatment does not detract to some extent from the life of the carpet;
but this consideration appears to be outweighed by that of the more
attractive appearance.

It has been stated that it is not an uncommon practice to expose a
carpet to use in the bazaar or street with the object of enhancing its
commercial value by giving it an artificial appearance of age. It is to
be hoped, however, that this very insanitary method of faking is rare;
but those who wilfully give preference to a carpet because it is dirty
and faded, and apparently old, do not deserve too much sympathy.

There are varieties of Asiatic carpets far too numerous to be mentioned
here. They differ widely in origin, design, colour, and quality, each
town or district having its characteristic pattern and ornament, which
is followed with more or less persistence. The finest carpets, both in
pattern and quality, are the Persian, the worst are some of the Indian,
which are coarse in texture and devoid of artistic merit. In between are
the standard Turkeys, which are in great and steady demand all over
Europe.

Reference has been made to the very different position occupied by
Asiatic and European, or at any rate British hand-tufted carpets.
Practically identical in manufacture, they are in different categories
commercially. The Eastern carpet trade is a large one, healthy, well
organised, and profitable. The British hand-tufted industry is
artificial, and maintains a precarious existence.

It may not be considered quite outside the scope of this chapter to
examine the reason for this position. The question is in reality purely
an economic one. British hand-tufted carpets cannot be manufactured on a
basis of cost that enables them to compete in price with the imported
Eastern carpet. The question of design and colour may be ignored for the
moment; quality for quality, the domestic product cannot meet its
Oriental competitor on equal terms in the market, despite the fact that
it comes straight from the manufacturer, while the other has probably
had to bear collectors’ and wholesale dealers’ profits.

The reason lies, of course, in the different standard of living. The
cost of the raw materials is not substantially different in Great
Britain and in Asia Minor. But the British carpet has got to pay for
steam-heating, gas and water, and electric light, and a more liberal
standard of diet, than suffices the frugal Armenian or Kurd. The women
and girls who weave Eastern carpets are not protected by factory
inspectors and welfare superintendents.

And the difference in cost of production due to these very different
conditions is very considerable; while in view of the increase of wages
during the war, and the steadily advancing standard of comfort among
British artisans, it seems likely to be even more in the future.

Under these circumstances, it is justifiable to ask whether it is fair
and wise to allow this competition to continue. During the war the
import of Oriental carpets has been prohibited, and it cannot be claimed
that the results have been disastrous. The stock of Oriental carpets
existing in the country when the prohibition was initiated has changed
hands at steadily increasing prices. In other words, the people who
wanted the carpets keenly enough have got them, and have had to pay
handsomely for them. Why should not this prohibition, or alternatively a
high import duty, be maintained? No one would suffer except the Turk,
about whose financial welfare we need not perturb ourselves, and
possibly the semi-European middleman and agent. The _bona fide_ dealer
in Oriental carpets, located in Great Britain, would be able to convert
his capital and his technical knowledge towards the building up of a big
British hand-tufted industry; and in a few years we should see in
private houses, hotels, and clubs, instead of the Asiatic product, for
which our money has been sent out of the country, real British hand-made
carpets, which would have been manufactured under ideal conditions, and
for good wages. And there is no reason in the world why such carpets
should not equal or surpass in quality and artistic merit the finest
productions of the East.




                               CHAPTER V
                                BRUSSELS


OF machine-made carpets, that which naturally demands the first mention
is the Brussels carpet, which was the first kind to be woven in this
country by the aid of a Jacquard, a pattern-selecting mechanism to which
allusion will be made later. Brussels is a loop-pile fabric, consisting
of a strong woven foundation, composed of linen, jute, and cotton yarns,
together with that portion of the worsted yarn which is not utilised on
the surface to form the pattern. The pattern itself is formed on the
surface by differently coloured looped threads of worsted yarns.

The character of the fabric lends itself to patterns well-defined in
design and colour. The smooth, gently-ribbed surface gives a clean and
neat, but not a luxurious effect; and the carpet is generally more
suitable for small and medium-sized rooms and simple furnishing schemes,
than for bold or ambitious effects. The number of shades available is
also limited.

The processes of manufacture are comparatively few and simple.

The yarn is received from the spinner in grease, that is, still
containing the oil that was put into the wool for the purpose of
spinning, and in skeins. Worsted spinners supply a large variety of
counts and twists of yarn for Brussels and Wilton carpets, which need
not be particularised. As a normal Brussels yarn we may take 16s, 2 × 3;
a thread sharply twisted in the doubling, and loosely in the
re-doubling, running about 100 yards to the ounce. The yarn should be
spun from wool of a moderately long staple.

In the dye-house it is first scoured, to get rid of the oil, which would
interfere with the dyeing, and then dyed. From the dye-vat the yarn is
taken to the hydro-extractor, or wince, where a large proportion of the
moisture is eliminated by centrifugal force. The skeins of dyed yarn are
then dried, either by being hung on poles and exposed to a current of
warm air, or by being passed through a mechanical dryer, which normally
consists of a large chamber of wood and iron, through which the yarn is
carried by an apron, or pair of aprons, while exposed to streams of hot
air propelled by fans.

From the drying room or drying machine, the yarn passes to the winding
room, to be wound on to bobbins. The winding frame consists of a series
of pulleys set on a shaft. Opposite each pulley or drum is a swift on
which the skein is adjusted, the end of the yarn from the skein being
led on to the body of the empty bobbin, which is held against and
rotated by the pulley, the face of the pulley being a little less than
the space between the flanges of the bobbin. This bobbin, called the
creel bobbin, because it goes into the creel frames of the loom, has a
face of 2¾ in. and a flange diameter of 3½ in.

The creel bobbins, each of which when fully wound will contain about 1/3
lb. of yarn, are then taken to the creel frames at the back of the loom.
For a best five-frame Brussels carpet, five sets of 256 or 260 bobbins
will be required. These five sets are placed in each of the five creel
frames, each bobbin being free to revolve slowly on a creel peg, and so
release its yarn as required. Each of the 1,280 or 1,300 ends of yarn is
led through to the front of the loom, being threaded first individually
through an eyelet in the harness, and then, along with the other ends of
yarn that belong with it, through a reed of the sley.

The body and back of the carpet is provided for normally by two warp
beams, the chain and the stuffer. The chain consists of twice as many
ends of cotton as there are reeds in the sley. Thus, if the pitch is
256, there will be 256 reeds, or reed spaces in the 27 in. width of the
sley (in practice the sley is made a little wider than the carpet is to
be woven); and there will be 512 ends of cotton chain in the same width,
two to each reed space. The stuffer beam consists normally of as many
ends as there are reed spaces. The stuffer warp is of jute, bump, or
cotton yarn.

The object of the chain is to form, in combination with the weft, the
woven base of the fabric; all the rest is either surface or back. The
weave is effected by the chain ends being threaded through eyelets
mounted on two heald-frames or gears, which rise alternately in such a
way as to allow the shuttle, carrying the weft, to be shot through the
shed or opening thus formed.

The purpose of the stuffer, or dead warp, is merely to give body or
weight to the fabric, and it is not essential if there is enough body
provided by the rest of the warp. The stuffer ends are also carried on
eyelets in a gear frame, but are not divided like the chain, and remain
practically in the middle of the fabric.

Both chain and stuffer beams lie between the creel frames and the main
part of the loom. Their slow unwinding is operated automatically while
the loom is running.

The harness consists of a set of 1,300 cords, carrying the mails or
eyelets through which the worsted is threaded, kept taut by a weight at
their lower ends, and connected with the Jacquard mechanism above. The
Jacquard (the invention of Joseph Marie Jacquard, of Lyons) is an
ingenious device for selecting and raising the threads required to form
the pattern. The Jacquard principle in various forms is in use
throughout the textile trades, and need not be described in detail here.
The essential feature of it is the combination of perforated paper or
card with needles or pegs in such a way that the blank (or, it may be,
the perforation) in the card causes the harness carrying a certain
thread, or set of threads, to rise as required.

The operation of the Brussels loom may now be described. The ends of
worsted yarn from the creel bobbins having been drawn through the eyes
in the harness, and the chain and stuffer ends through the eyes in the
healds, all are drawn through the sley in such a way that there will be
in each reed-space five ends of worsted, two of cotton chain, and one of
stuffer warp. All ends are now made fast to the breast roller at the
front of the loom, and kept taut by weighting the warp beams, and by
hanging small hooked weights on to each thread of worsted close to the
bobbin in the creel frame.

[Illustration: FIG. 2
LONGITUDINAL SECTION THROUGH HEALDS, HARNESS, SLEY, AND FABRIC
A, Stuffer warp; B, Worsted warps; C, Chain; J, Comberboard; K, Mail; L,
  Lingo; H, Healds; 1 to 6, Harness]

When the loom is running, the Jacquard lifts one worsted thread in each
reed, thus forming a shed, under which the wire is introduced from the
side. Immediately below the wire now lies the body of the fabric,
consisting of the four frames of worsted in each course, which are not
required to form the pattern, the stuffer warp, and one half of the
cotton chain. Below the body of the fabric is a lower shed formed by the
other half of the cotton chain, and through this the shuttle passes,
carrying the weft, at the same time as the wire is being inserted. Then
the lathe, which has been lying back to allow the passing of the shuttle
and the entrance of the wire, comes forward with the sley, and beats up
the wire and the last shot of weft against the breast-plate of the loom
and the last part of the woven fabric. At the same time the Jacquard
allows the harness carrying the ends selected for the last lash to drop
back on to a level with the others, and the gears carrying the cotton
chain begin to change. Next, the lathe goes back again; one half of the
chain is brought up to form a shed, under which and over the rest of the
threads the shuttle passes back, thus effectively tying in the worsted
threads which are looped over the wire. Meanwhile the last wire of the
set (of about 30) which has moved forward as the fabric is woven, is
drawn out by a hook, and carried back for insertion under the next shed
of worsted. A number of wires is used so as to avoid the risk of the
loops being pulled flat by the weight on the yarn or the strain of the
harness or sley.

Chains and stuffers are generally coloured and sized, the yarn being
slowly wound from bobbins or cheeses on a frame or stand, passing
through a trough of coloured starching material, over a steam-heated
cylinder, or a series of pipes, on to an iron flanged beam. The weft,
which is normally of linen yarn, is also generally coloured and sized,
and is used whilst still damp. The colouring certainly adds to the
appearance of the carpet, and the sizing adds stiffness and handling,
though, apart from this, and from the fact that it is expected by the
dealer, it is doubtful whether it is of any advantage, except in the
cheaper grades, where less yarn is used.

Brussels and Wilton carpets are described as being of five, four, or
three frames, according to the number of sets of creel bobbins carrying
worsted warp threads. Each frame will generally be composed of threads
all of one colour; but an enhanced colour effect is often obtained by
one or more of the frames being “planted.” This means that worsted
threads of two or more colours are arranged side by side in the same
frame in groups, in accordance with the design. If, for instance, the
design contains a rose, for the petals of which a frame of pink yarn is
to be used, then the colourist or weaver, by a judicious selection and
arrangement of bobbins, can add to the colour effect by shading the
petals from light to dark; or, again, a flower may be coloured blue in
one part of the design and gold in another. Skilfully used, this device
makes a three-frame look like a four, or a five-frame like a six, but it
must be used with discretion and with due regard to the design, or
disfiguring and tell-tale stripes will ensue.

[Illustration: FIG. 3
SECTION OF FIVE-FRAME BRUSSELS CARPET
A A, Chain; B, Pile warp; C, Stuffer warp]

Best Brussels has been taken as an example in describing the process of
manufacture, but a good many other qualities are, or at least have been,
made. Best is 256 pitch, beaten up 9 to the inch, but extra qualities
are made up to 11 per inch, which gives an excellently close and even
surface. Finer than this in pitch or beat-up it has not been found
practicable to go. Lower qualities are made in 236 and 214 pitch, and
even down to 180, with beat-ups running down to 6½ or 6 per inch, and a
framage of three or two. In the coarsest qualities, however, there is
always the tendency to “grin,” that is, for the weft and body of the
carpet to be exposed between the loops of the pile, unless the
coarseness is compensated by the employment of a thicker pile yarn or a
higher wire. This is, in fact, the case with a class of Brussels that
has been manufactured extensively by some makers in recent years, where
the yarn is spun from low wool or cow-hair, and is a good deal heavier
than the ordinary Brussels worsted counts. This fabric is almost
entirely confined to plains and stripes, though occasionally two frames
are used, and a simple pattern effect produced. It is a good wearing
carpet, and suitable for offices and modest purses.

[Illustration: FIG. 4
SECTION OF THREE-FRAME BRUSSELS CARPET
A, Chain; B, Pile warp; C, Stutter warp; E, Weft]

The fact is, however, that the demand for all qualities of Brussels
carpeting has fallen off steadily during the past few years; and the
reasons for this are strong and would seem likely to be permanent.
Brussels has suffered from the competition of Axminster on the one hand,
and Tapestry on the other. Brussels is, unfortunately, an uneconomic
fabric in its manufacture, inasmuch as, in a five-frame for instance,
for every length of worsted that appears on the surface, four times as
much is hidden in the body of the fabric, and, except in so far as it
acts as filling, is wasted. A Tapestry carpet, as will be explained
later, avoids this waste, and can therefore be produced with an equally
good surface as Brussels, and at a lower cost. We ignore for the moment
the characteristic defect of Tapestry carpets.

The cheaper Axminster, again, and to some extent the cheaper Chenille
Axminster as well, have largely superseded Brussels, owing to the fact
that they can be sold at almost the same price, while offering a more
luxurious effect with their cut pile surface and their larger range of
colours.

There are some dealers, moreover, who aver that the manufacturers of the
cheaper qualities of Brussels have themselves to blame for the decreased
demand, because these qualities were not satisfactory in wear, and in
particular were liable to “sprout.” Sprouting is the tendency of the
loops in the pile of a Brussels carpet to be pulled out through such
external agencies as a chair leg, a boot nail, a rubber heel, or the
claw of a dog or cat; though, indeed, complaints seem often to have been
framed as if on the assumption that sprouting was a natural property of
the carpet similar to that of its vegetable namesake. Still, the maker
has had to admit that cheaper qualities are more liable to the disease
than better ones, and perhaps his best retort has been that he was long
borne down in price and pressed to make cheaper qualities, and that
those who demand them must not complain too much if they do not get all
they expect.

Still, when all is said, with all its limitations, a good Brussels is an
excellent carpet. It has a clean surface which does not harbour dust,
and if the same can also be said of the Ingrain carpet, Brussels has the
extra resiliency afforded by the looped pile. If its colours are few,
they are enough to give thousands of effective variations, suitable for
almost any kind of design; and the comparative closeness of its pitch
makes its patterns neat and adaptable. A well-made Brussels carpet will
wear many years.

Reverting to the processes of manufacture, the roll of carpet goes from
the loom to the measuring table, where it is measured by hand or machine
before passing to the finishing or “picking” room. Here it is first
dried by passing over a steam-heated cylinder, or, in some places, by
being looped over a series of rails in a warm chamber. Then the back of
the carpet is picked; that is, the superfluous material, if any, is
removed and defects remedied. The roll is then passed through a shearing
machine, provided with a rapidly revolving shaft set with spiral blades,
where the surface is brushed and very lightly shorn, to remove loose and
projecting fibres. The surface of the carpet then is inspected by the
pickers, who mend any faults left from the weaving. Their work is
supervised and checked by the passers. At this stage, some manufacturers
pass their Brussels carpets, particularly the cheaper qualities, through
a pressing machine, in which heavy pressure on the looped pile is
exerted by rollers, the object being to obtain better cover, and to
prevent grinning. It is questionable, however, whether the process is of
any real benefit to the carpet, as it tends to impair the handle of the
fabric and the resiliency of the pile. The final stage in the finishing
department is the rolling and measuring, which is done mechanically,
after which the roll is ticketed, papered, and corded, and passes on its
journey to the packing room, carpet room, or warehouse, as the case may
be.

A digression seems necessary here on the subject of breadth carpets,
Cairo or Chlidema squares. Originally, carpeting was only made in body
or filling 27 in. wide, and border 22½ or 18 in. wide, and in rolls or
pieces of about 50 yards; and if a bordered carpet was required, 15 ft.
by 12 ft., the dealer would cut it up from the pieces, using, say, four
breadths of filling each 12 ft. long, and enough border, ½ yd. wide, to
go all round, with mitred joints at the corners. There were several
objections to this method, which is, of course, still necessarily
employed in bordered carpets of unusual sizes. It involves a thick and
awkward seam at the mitres, where the border has to be cut and turned
under; it is wasteful, as odd-shaped bits of border are bound to be left
over; and it is inartistic, inasmuch as the figures in the border never
match perfectly at the mitre. Lastly, in Wiltons and in some Axminsters,
it causes false shading, because, the pile naturally leaning a little in
one direction, and not being perfectly vertical, the border will only
tone perfectly with the body on one side of the carpet. On the three
other sides the light will strike the pile at a different angle from
that at which it strikes the pile of the body, and give a different
effect.

In 1863, a carpet was manufactured at Kidderminster for presentation to
the late King Edward VII, then Prince of Wales, on the occasion of his
marriage. In view of the natural desire to produce an article worthy of
the event and of the industry, it was recognised that no trouble and
expense should be spared; and a carpet was designed and woven in such a
way as to obviate the defects enumerated above. The carpet was exhibited
publicly and aroused much admiration.

It is curious, however, to note that it was not until about twenty years
later that the new principle began to be generally adopted by carpet
manufacturers. The delay in utilising the idea was no doubt due to
recognition of the heavy expense involved in additional designing and
card stamping, and of the loss of production, and also to the absence of
any severe competition from Oriental and other seamless carpets.

The device consisted simply in designing and stamping not two but five
parts of the whole carpet: the filling, the border at each side
including the corner piece, and the border at top and bottom. When, as
is almost invariably the case, the width of the border is less than 27
in., the difference between the width and 27 in. is stamped in body, so
that, for example, an outside breadth containing 18 in. of border and 9
in. of body is woven in a 27 in. loom. This breadth, of course, also
contains at each end the corner piece, and 9 in. of the end border. The
inner breadths of the carpet will have 18 in. of border at each end, and
filling in between, woven so as to match on to the filling and border of
the breadths on each side. If will be readily seen that in this manner
the different breadths of a carpet can be woven consecutively on the
same loom, and that a harmonious effect as regards both design and
surface can be ensured. (See Figs. 5 and 5A.)

[Illustration: FIG. 5 & 5A    CHLIDEMA SQUARE]

The system has one or two minor limitations. The width of the carpet
must be some multiple of 2 ft. 3 in., and the matching of the side
borders with the corner pieces can only be perfect at certain lengths.
Again, the line of the seam is not concealed by coinciding with the
inner edge of the border; and, finally, these breadth squares are more
troublesome and expensive to make and handle at every stage than piece
goods. Indeed, manufacturers would be justified in charging a larger
difference of price between squares and pieces of the same quality than
many of them do.

In spite of the expense and loss of production involved, the device
proved on the whole a real boon both to the maker and consumer of
carpets, and was sooner or later adopted by practically all
manufacturers employing 3-4 wide looms. It placed those who utilised it
in a better position to compete with Eastern carpets, and it has thereby
contributed in no small degree to the artistic development of the carpet
trade. Indeed, it may almost be said to have saved the life of the
narrow loom, in view of the remarkable evolution and consequent
competition of the wide loom, to which further reference will be made
later.

In recent years it has been turned to a notable development in the art
of carpet making; the production of medallion breadth squares. This
involves the exercise of the greatest ingenuity and skill on the part of
the designer, heavy expense in respect of card-cutting, and the greatest
care in weaving and finishing. When completed, a medallion square is a
triumph of technique. The number of sizes available is obviously
limited; but a carpet of each size is absolutely perfect in design,
matching everywhere, as well as if made laboriously by hand, instead of
being the product of machinery and brains.

Coming back once more to the final stages of finishing, though the roll
of carpeting, body, border, or stair, is complete and ready for the
market when it is rolled and papered, this is not the case with the
breadth square, which has so far been treated in the same way. The
square, or series of squares, which are still in a continuous roll, are
cut up into their proper lengths, matched, and sorted. They are then
passed to the sewing room, to be made up into complete carpets. Hand
sewing has been superseded in most factories by mechanical sewing, by
hand or electric power, for which Messrs. Singer supply a very efficient
machine. In the larger power machine made by this house, the breadths to
be sewn together are clipped face to face with flush edges, and
stretched in the frame of the machine in such a way that the moving part
of the mechanism runs along over the two edges and sews them together.
The ends of the carpet, top and bottom, are then turned over and hemmed
by hand or machine. The carpet is then fastened to the floor, face
downwards, and the seams are damped and then pressed with a heavy heated
iron. If these operations have been properly performed, and if the edges
of the breadths are good, the seams of the carpet will be barely
visible. The carpet is then finished, though some manufacturers prefer
to stretch their carpets by attaching them tightly to a frame, and
leaving them for some hours.

From the sewing room the carpets pass to the stock room or the packing
room.




                               CHAPTER VI
                                 WILTON


WILTON carpeting is similar in manufacture in many respects to Brussels.
The loom is practically the same for both fabrics, convertible from one
to the other without much difficulty or expense. The preparation of
yarns for worsted pile, chain, stuffer, and weft is substantially
identical, while most of what has been said with regard to weaving and
finishing operations applies no less to Brussels than to Wilton.

The essential differences are two—a major and a minor one. In the first
place, the loops of worsted yarns are cut, so that the character of the
surface is velvety instead of smooth and ribbed. This is effected by the
use of a narrow wire ending in a knife blade, which blade stands outside
the fabric when the wire is inserted, but severs the loops of worsted
when the wire is withdrawn.

The second difference, which, however, does not apply to all grades of
Wilton carpet, is that for the sake of holding down the pile more
securely, there are three shots of weft to each row of pile, instead of
two. This is effected by an adjustment of the gear and harness motions,
in such a way that the lash or shed of worsted selected to form the
pattern does not rise alternately with the shed of the chain, but once
in every three picks of the shuttle or beats of the sley.

The cutting of the yarn, resulting as it does in exposing to view the
ends instead of the sides of the wool fibre, gives a richer and softer
surface effect both in appearance and in feel, while the treble weft
shot makes a better weave and a firmer fabric. Generally also Wilton
carpeting is woven closer, with more rows to the inch, than Brussels,
which necessitates, incidentally, the use of thinner wires.

The standard best or Super Wilton carpet is 256 pitch, with a beat-up of
10 to the inch, woven with a wire about 3/16 in. high; a linen weft is
used, and a stuffer of bump. Five frames of worsted are generally
employed. This is an excellent carpet for dining and drawing rooms,
theatres, show rooms, and restaurants, and will wear well. Several
better qualities are made, however; and the fabric lends itself readily
to fine and luxurious effects. Wires are used occasionally as high as
3/8 in. or more.

[Illustration: Fig. 6
SECTION OF FIVE-FRAME WILTON
A, Chain; B, Pile warp; C, Stuffer warp]

Depth of pile, however, is not the highest desideratum in a Wilton
carpet; and the most notable development of recent years in the fabric
has been in the direction of a fine, closely woven fabric with no
excessive wool surface. These fine Wiltons are made 256 pitch, 12 or 13
shots per inch, and are generally 2-shot, with chain, stuffer, and weft
of cotton. Neither depth of pile nor weight is aimed at, but fineness
and smoothness of surface and artistic effect; and their great
popularity in spite of the present high price seems to indicate that
they have justified themselves. At the present time most manufacturers
of Wilton produce a fine Wilton quality of this nature.

Among the better qualities of Wilton, mention must be made of Saxonies,
the name given to Wiltons woven with a heavy, sharply twisted twofold
Saxony worsted yarn, which possesses exceptional wearing qualities.

Below Super Wilton come the medium qualities, made in 236 pitch, 10 to
the inch, in five, four, and three frames; artistic and serviceable
carpets suitable for studies, bed-rooms, and what may be called general
use; while they are also in great demand for Cinema theatres.

The cheaper grades of Wilton are made in 214 pitch with three frames or
less. Their manufacture has been limited during the war by the
restricted supplies of worsted yarn; and even before that time they
suffered from the competition of woollen Wiltons, of which mention will
be made. The limitation of colours on the one hand, and the comparative
poverty of the fabric on the other, restricted the demand to those for
whom the question of price was important; and now that price-cutting has
passed away in an era of high values and shortage of material, these
qualities are out of favour.

Woollen Wiltons, or Wilton fabrics whose pile is made of a sharply
twisted woollen yarn, instead of worsted, require special mention. They
are of comparatively recent growth, and probably originated in the
effort of the Jacquard loom manufacturer to meet the competition of
Imperial Axminster, dating from the time when the price of the latter
fabric was round about 4s., and woollen yarn was correspondingly cheap.
It was necessarily rather an uphill fight for the Jacquard loom, because
the Axminster possessed the initial advantages of a greatly superior
range of colours, and of greater economy in manufacture owing to the
yarn being all on the surface.

The price of woollen Wiltons therefore had to be appreciably lower, and
the qualities cut as much as they would stand. Working on this basis,
however, the woollen Wiltons did justify their existence. Made mainly in
214 pitch, with three frames of yarn or less, and beaten up from 8½ to
7½ per inch, they achieved unambitious but ingenious and saleable
effects, and if the cover and consequent wear was not all that could
have been desired, yet they served a purpose.

But it must not be implied that the only woollen Wiltons were, or are,
the cheap grades. The suitability of woollen yarn for use in a Wilton
loom to produce a soft and even luxurious fabric with an Oriental effect
has long been recognised; and admirable qualities have been woven in 256
and 236 pitch with four or five frames of yarn and with fairly high
wires. Indeed, some of these can be regarded as more successfully
imitating the Eastern carpet in texture than even the finer worsted
Wiltons.

Wilton carpeting lends itself particularly well to single shade effects:
plain Wiltons have been woven in a variety of qualities with both
worsted and woollen yarn for many years; and, indeed, the demand has
shown signs of a steady increase. For those who are content with a
single colour on the floor in their scheme of furnishing, and who do not
object to the sensitiveness of a plain carpet to “shading,” and, indeed,
to the recording of individual footprints, no fabric is better than a
plain Wilton. But it should be borne in mind that a plain carpet has
that defect. Wool fibre is elastic, but not infinitely so. A plain
carpet, however well and carefully woven, cannot be expected to retain
its virgin smoothness and level colour for long under wear. Wear on a
carpet is never evenly distributed: the feet tread down some places more
than others; the pile is depressed unequally, with the result that, in a
plain carpet, the light, falling at different angles upon the fibres
causes light and dark patches to appear. This is called shading, and is
often wrongly attributed to defective manufacture, or to the presence of
some foreign substance like oil. Shading actually occurs equally in
figured Wiltons; but it is rarely the subject of complaint, simply
because it is concealed by the design and colours.

Subject to this limitation, then, plain carpets, and plain Wiltons in
particular, are all right for those who like them. The manufacturer does
not regard them with great enthusiasm, for, though in some respects they
are easier to make than figured goods, yet they are exacting if they are
to be turned out perfectly. Moreover, they are more subject to
competition, and do not afford scope for artistic skill in design and
colour combination.

As has been indicated, Wilton carpeting, like Brussels, has, in
comparison with some of its competitors, two main limitations; one
economic and one artistic. For every square or tuft of yarn showing on
the surface, there are, roughly, from two to four parts uneconomically
used in the body of the fabric, and the number of shades that can be
used to work one over the other to form the pattern is limited to five,
or, exceptionally, to six. These limitations, however, are not serious
ones; and the Wilton carpet, in its higher grades, is regarded by many
as the best of all machine-made carpets. It is certainly the finest; and
closeness of texture, broadly speaking, means both finer effects and
better wear. The higher grades of Wilton are made, as has been stated,
in pitch and beat-up which give from 95 to 123 points to the square
inch; so that in the matter both of texture and of delicacy of design,
effects can be produced in Wilton which surpass those of any other
carpet fabric, with the exception of the finest Persians.




                              CHAPTER VII
                               AXMINSTER


AXMINSTER carpets, though in point of time a comparatively recent
development of the industry, may claim to be, in point of structure, the
nearest related of all machine-made fabrics to the Oriental ancestor.
The similarity lies in the fact that they are tufted; and the tuft,
though inserted in the fabric mechanically, and bound down without being
knotted, undoubtedly represents the knotted tuft of the original
hand-made carpet. The essential feature of a tufted Axminster carpet is
that the tufts are inserted row by row between the warp threads, either
before or after being cut off, and are then bound down by the weft, and
so woven into the ground of the texture. Each tuft is used on the
surface, and forms part of the design; none of the tuft material is
hidden away or wasted in the body of the fabric beyond what is needed
for attachment to the binding weft.

The Axminster loom was introduced into England from the United States
about 1878; and since that time the fabric has developed steadily, with
an increasing popularity, which has only been rivalled in recent years
by that of the Chenille Axminster. Bradbury, in commenting upon the
similarity of Axminster in structure and appearance to the original
hand-made carpet, says: “Generally speaking they are far superior to
Eastern and hand-made productions, and where price is permitted to enter
as a factor, they leave these primitive structures still further in the
rear.” This may appear to some an extravagant appreciation; but there
can be no difference of opinion as regards the general merits of the
fabric. It combines economy in the use of material, and in manufacture,
with richness of texture and almost unlimited potentialities of design
and colour effect.

As in other carpet fabrics, there are in Axminster plenty of varieties
of qualities; but there are comparatively few differences in structure,
such differences as exist being mainly matters of pitch, tuft, or method
of tufting and binding. The original Axminster quality was called the
Royal. This is about 5 per inch in the pitch, and 6 in the beat-up, with
a tuft of about 7/8 in. This held the field until 1893, when a strong
invasion of the British market by American Axminster, offered at a
considerably lower price, caused the Axminster makers of this country to
bestir themselves to meet this competition. They did so strenuously; and
the result was the production of the quality known as the Imperial
Axminster, which had an instant and a lasting success. This was made in
a pitch of 7 to the inch, and a beat-up of about 6½, and was put on the
market at a moderate price. For many years it held the position of being
the critical quality of the whole trade; the standard by which the value
of other qualities was measured, and, as has been intimated, it is only
of recent years that its position has been challenged by the Chenille
Axminster.

At the present time, it would probably be safe to estimate that
three-quarters of Axminster manufacturers’ looms are being run on this
quality.

The Imperial Axminster quality may, therefore, be taken as typical of
the fabric; and a description of how it is made will cover most of the
ground, while variations from the standard type can be indicated. The
quality itself is made in slightly different ways by different makers,
but a normal standard will have the usual double chain, preferably of
2-14 or other linen, but sometimes of cotton, a cotton stuffer, one end
to each reed, and a jute weft of about 2 fold 7½ lb. count. The pitch is
189 or 190 in the 3-4 width. Fig. 7 gives a transverse section through
the weft of the weave ordinarily employed. In this there are three warps
employed, the two chain warps being wound on one beam, and the stuffer
warp, which runs straight in the fabric, on another. There are three
double shots of weft to each row of tufts. The two halves of the chain
warp alternately bind two double shots above, the tuft binding shot and
the intermediate, and one below. The effect of this structure is to form
a flat back, and also, through the lateral pressure of the intermediate
weft upon the tuft weft, under the same warp shed, to give the tuft a
distinct inclination out of the vertical, adding thereby to the fabric a
point of similarity to the hand-tufted carpet.

[Illustration: FIG. 7
SECTION OF IMPERIAL AXMINSTER. 3-SHOT
A, Chain; B, Tufts; C, Stuffer warp; D, Double weft]

The diagram of another method of weaving this quality is given in Fig.
8.

Three warps are used here again, but as each undergoes a different rate
of consumption, they are wound upon three separate beams. The stuffer,
as before, runs straight; one chain binds the bottom and the
intermediate shots, and the other the tuft shot. In this case, the tuft,
equally supported on each side, tends to remain vertical, while the
bottom weft, projecting below the tuft weft, gives the back a ribbed
appearance.

[Illustration: FIG. 8
SECTION OF AXMINSTER. 3-SHOT
A, Chain; B, Tufts; C, Stuffer warp; D, Double weft]

Each of these two weaves has its merits. The former gives better cover
with its sloping tuft, while the latter claims an increased resiliency
and immunity from the shading in made-up carpets, so noticeable with the
first-named weave.

Fig. 9 gives other but less usual structures. It may be noted that it is
possible to employ jute for the tuft binding and intermediate weft
shots, and at the same time a different yarn, preferably of woollen, for
the bottom weft, which shows on the back. This serves to make the carpet
heavier and more elastic to the tread.

Axminster may to some extent be compared with Tapestry and Chenille, in
that it is essentially a two-process fabric; and the pile yarns are
arranged so as to form the design before they are put into the loom. The
actual method of preparation of the colours is, however, quite different
from that employed in either of the other two fabrics.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.
SECTIONS OF AXMINSTER WEAVES]

The yarn is received from the dye-house in skeins, and is wound on to
large bobbins with a 6 in. face. The yarn from these bobbins has then to
be wound on to a series of wide spools, the number of which will be the
number of the rows of tufts in one complete repeat of the design to be
woven, while each spool contains as many ends of yarn as there are
squares in the width of the design. This operation is called setting, or
sometimes, reeding-in.

The 6 in. bobbins, in number equal to the pitch of the carpet, say, 189
or 190 for the 3-4 width of the typical quality mentioned above, are
arranged on a creel frame fitted with horizontal pegs in order
corresponding with the colours of the first row of the design.
Alternatively, a horizontal frame or table is employed, fitted with
vertical pegs for the bobbins. This has the advantage of being more
compact and accessible, but the colours are not so easily distinguished.
The ends of the yarn from each bobbin are led on to the wide spool,
through an open sley, which is opposite to it and equal in width. These
ends, suitably tensioned, are then wound on to the wide spool. For a
design of average length of repeat, say 1 yd., one full spool will weave
about 250 yds. When the spool is full, therefore, the yarns are cut, and
fastened down; and as many more spools are filled with the same
arrangement of colours as are needed to weave the required quantity. The
operators then re-arrange the bobbins in the creel frame in accordance
with the second row of the design paper, which is set up in some
convenient place for reference, draw them in order through the sley on
to the spool, wind a second set of spools, and so on; each spool being
numbered with its rotation as soon as filled.

When the spools for the whole of the repeat are wound, whether one or
more for each row of tufts, they are passed to women, whose task it is
to thread the ends through a series of tin tubes, the number of which
corresponds with the number of ends on each spool. The tubes are
soldered to a piece of tin, of L-shaped section, which is attached to
the tufting carriage. The spools with tubes attached are then placed in
the carriages, and are ready to be set up in order in the loom for
weaving.

[Illustration: FIG. 10
TUFTING MECHANISM
A, Wide spool; B, Pin; C, Finger; D, Tufting carriage; E, Tubes; soldered
  at F; G, Guide-bar; H, Transferring arm; I, Finger; K, Spring; L, Link of
  chain; M, Side view of tube; N, Angle attachment]

The tufting carriages are then placed, in the correct rotation so as to
form the pattern, upon a pair of endless chains, which are actuated by
the driving mechanism of the loom in such a way as to have an
intermittent motion so that, when each spool is in position to make its
row of tufts, the chains remain at rest long enough for the spool to be
removed from them, lowered for the tubes to enter the warp threads; for
the tufts to be cut off, and the spool to be replaced on the chains.

Each spool with its set of tubes and carriage, therefore, is so set in
the chains that it can be automatically detached at the right moment and
brought into position to form its successive line of fur. The mechanism
that effects these ingenious movements is too complicated to describe
here. It is an object lesson as to what variable and intermittent
motions can be produced by combinations of cams, bowls, levers, rods,
etc., while it gives the Axminster loom the distinction of being
probably the most ingenious of all carpet looms, subject perhaps to that
remarkable piece of mechanism, the Jacquard, not being regarded as
exclusively part of a carpet loom.

When the spool reaches the lowest point in the path of the double chain
which carries it, a few inches above the fell of the cloth, it is nipped
by an arm from each side, and conveyed downwards in such a way that the
tubes with the ends of the tuft yarns projecting are made to enter the
spaces between the upper shed of the chain warp with a slight sweeping
movement from the front to the back. This has the result of trailing the
ends of the yarn close to the fell of the cloth and the last row of
tufts, and leaving a space below the upper shed of the chain, so that
the weft-carrying needle is able to insert a double shot above the
middle of the exposed lengths of tuft yarn.

The tufting tubes are now lifted out of the shed, and somewhat forward
towards the fell of the carpet, so as to double the tuft round the
binding shot. At the same time the sley comes forward, presses against
the tuft yarns and the weft enclosed by them, and carries them up to the
breast comb and the fell of the carpet. With the tuft yarns and the
spool in position, another shot of weft is inserted, either with or
without a change of the warp shed, as the case may be, to assist in
holding fast the row of tufts in the carpet. The tufting carriage and
tubes are then lifted high enough to draw off a sufficient length of
yarn to form the next row of tufts in the following repeat. The tufts
are then cut by the meeting of two broad knives, which come together at
the level of the surface of the carpet with a scissor-cutting motion.
The spool and carriage are then replaced in the chains, moved one step
forward; and the succeeding spool is brought into position.

It may be desirable to mention a different method of inserting the tuft
yarn. In this case the spool is detached from the chain and made to
descend almost straight, turning about 60° out of the vertical towards
the back of the loom just as the tubes enter the warp shed. This has the
effect of turning the free ends of the tufts somewhat upwards. The spool
is then turned again so that the tubes are vertical, and are brought
close against the fell of the cloth. The binding weft is then inserted,
and the sley comes forward to carry the tufts up against the breast. At
this stage, a toothed comb, made in two parts, one working over the
other, comes up from below the breast to turn upwards the loose ends of
the pile through the warp, one part of the double comb, called the dummy
comb, slipping over the other so as to clear any tufts which might be
pulled down on to the back. Then the second binding weft is put in,
behind the tufts; and at the same time the tufts are cut. There is
another beat-up of the sley, and the bottom weft is inserted. This
completes the cycle; the warp chains change; and the process is
repeated.

An alternative fashion of cutting to the double scissor or guillotine
knives is sometimes employed, a circular knife in front engaging against
a fixed straight knife at the back. This system has the advantage that
the knives have not to be kept sharp, though they must be very
accurately adjusted.

The weft motion is another ingenious piece of mechanism. The weft is
inserted in the warp shed by a needle about 5/8 in. in diameter,
entering from the right-hand side of the loom. The jute weft is conveyed
from a ball, tensioned by suitable springs, and threaded through the eye
of the needle. It is obvious that the weft shot must be double, and also
that it would not stay in the shed after the withdrawal of the needle,
unless it were caught in some way at the left hand of the loom. This is
effected by a small shuttle carrying the edge-thread. This shuttle is
similar to a sewing machine shuttle, but larger, being about 3 in. long
and 1 in. in diameter. It runs backwards and forwards in a semicircular
shuttle-race, and is so adjusted that it passes under a notch near the
end of the needle, and over a loop of the weft, carrying the edge-thread
through the loop, and holding it taut while the needle is receding in
such a way as to prevent the weft slipping back, and to make a good
selvedge to the carpet. When it is desired to use two different weft
threads, the needle has an open eye, or hook near its end, instead of
the ordinary eye, and the two wefts in turn are presented to this eye by
a rocking eyeletted weft-carrier, so that the needle picks up the weft
just before it enters the shed.

There have been other developments of the Axminster principle of
inserting tufts into the weave of the fabric, and variations from the
method of the wide spool and tubes. Of these, the most successful has
been based upon the idea of conveying the cut tufts by means of nippers
or grippers into the fell of the cloth. This has been worked in
combination with the wide spools, but more satisfactorily in combination
with yarn carriers operated by a Jacquard with a differential lift
mechanism for selecting the colours.

In this loom, which has been brought to perfection for various
qualities, pitches, and widths, in recent years, the pile yarns are
wound on to creel bobbins, which are arranged, in much the same way as
in Brussels and Wilton, in creel frames behind the loom. A frame of
bobbins is a set of bobbins of the same shade, equal in number to the
pitch of the loom. The number of frames is limited in practice to about
16, which, however, aided by “planting,” admit of design and colour
effects comparable with those obtainable in Royal Axminster.

The yarns are led between guide bars and through perforated plates into
the carriers, which are vertical strips of steel or brass grooved back
and front and drilled with a series of slots, through which the ends of
the yarn pass, being held in position by small springs. The frames of
yarn are threaded through the holes in the carriers in order, so that
the yarns of the top frame pass through the highest hole in the carrier,
the second frame through the second hole, and so on. Viewed from in
front, the ends of each frame of yarn will be seen in horizontal lines
one above the other in the front grooves of the carriers.

These carriers are connected by cords or wires with a differential lift
mechanism, which is actuated by the Jacquard, in such a way that the
blank or perforation on the Jacquard card, corresponding with a certain
colour, causes the carrier to be lifted until that colour is at the
required height.

It can readily be understood that cards perforated in different ways,
and presented to the Jacquard at once, can cause the carriers all across
the loom to be lifted varying heights in such a way as to show at the
required level a horizontal row of thread ends, corresponding to a row
across the width of the paper design. The sequence of these rows, of
course, forms the pattern.

It remains to cut off the tufts, to lay them in their place at the fell
of the cloth, and weave them into the carpet.

There is a set of grippers, in shape very similar to the neck and beak
of a bird, mounted on three shafts, and arranged so as to revolve in
about a semicircle between the carriers and the fell of the carpet. The
Jacquard, having operated so as to present the ends of the required
colour in the carriers in a horizontal line, the grippers come up in
front of them with open beaks, which are inserted just into the carrier
grooves, and then close, nipping the ends of the yarn. The whole of the
frame in which the carriers are mounted is then withdrawn away from the
points of the grippers a sufficient distance to give the required length
of tuft. A flat-toothed comb of hardened steel, of the same pitch as the
grippers, carriers, and carpet, drops down with its points between the
threads so as to hold them steady, while a travelling knife or set of
knives, passing along the face of the comb, severs the tufts. The
grippers then descend into the warp threads, laying the tufts against
the fell of the carpet; the needle or shuttle passes over them and
through the shed, carrying the binding weft, which is beaten up by the
open sley, at the same time as the grippers open to release the end of
the tuft, and double it upwards. Two other shots are inserted, while the
grippers move in their semicircular path upwards to seize the next row
of tufts, and again downwards to lay them in place.

The advantages claimed for this very ingenious method of Axminster
weaving are: that the preparatory processes are considerably simpler
than with the Royal and Crompton patents; that the quantity of any
pattern to be woven can be better controlled; and that it involves less
waste. There is no disadvantage in the weaving of a small quantity, if
required, as 1 yard or 500 can be woven equally well; and the yarn left
over at the end of an order can be cut off at the back of the carriers
with a minimum of waste, and stored conveniently on creel bobbins. The
cutting mechanism is also so good, that the surface waste is reduced to
a negligible quantity, and a minimum of shearing and finishing is
required.

However this may be, it is noteworthy that the principle has been
applied with complete success to looms for weaving wide seamless
carpets, where the gripper mechanism, though necessarily heavy, has
probably a distinct advantage over the wide spool and tubes.

Axminster, like other carpet fabrics, has tended to develop in the
direction of wide seamless goods; and this is a tendency that will be
worth watching, leading as it does towards the evolution of the ideal
carpet—a machine-made knotted fabric. Ideal, that is to say, in the
sense that the knotting of a tuft on to a groundwork of warp and weft is
the best way of putting a carpet together, and having regard for the
facts that we live in a mechanical age; that we cannot afford time or
money to make our own carpets by hand; and that we ought not to buy
foreign hand-made carpets. Experiments in mechanically knotted carpets
have continually been made, and definite progress has been won in recent
years; but the technical difficulties are considerable, and it will be
interesting to see whether a carpet of so exceptional a weave can be put
on the market, except at a price comparable only with that of a
hand-tufted fabric. Meanwhile, the seamless tufted Axminster, as it is
now made in two or three forms, with tufts as securely fastened for all
practical purposes into the body of the fabric as if they were knotted,
holds the field as the nearest approach to the ideal, and is deserving
of a far larger measure of support from the British consumer that it has
enjoyed hitherto.




                              CHAPTER VIII
                                CHENILLE


CHENILLE Axminster carpeting possesses one or two features which
differentiate it sharply from other kinds of carpet. It is the product
of two distinct processes: the formation of the chenille fur, and the
weaving of that fur, which is the weft, into a carpet. It is, in fact,
about the only cut-pile carpet fabric in which the pattern is
distinctively formed by the weft; for in almost all other makes the weft
only performs the function of combining with the chain to form the woven
fabric.

Taking first the manufacture of the fur, the dyed yarn, which is
normally a single woollen, about 55 yards per ounce, is wound on cops
which fit inside the shuttles for the weft looms. Before starting to
weave, the weaver will have a supply of cops of all the colours required
in the carpet. The paper design will show full size, the whole of the
pattern, filling and border, that repeats, in the colours that are to be
used. The design is cut up horizontally into strips two squares wide;
and the weaver works by this paper strip, which is attached to the
fabric in its length, inserting and changing the shuttles carrying yarn
of various colours. The warp of the loom consists of sets of ends of
fine cotton at intervals of about ½ in. Thus the woven fabric consists
of a woollen weft of various colours held together at intervals by a
fine cotton warp.

The pitch of the warp varies, of course, according to the character and
quality of the fur to be made, the scales, indicating the number of sets
of warp threads to the yard, being, normally, either 28, 38, 56, 76, or
112. On an ordinary weft loom, making a fabric 42 in. wide, on a 76
scale, there will be 88 strips, which will make two repeats of a certain
portion, say 4½ in. long, of 44 carpets. The average length of the woven
strip is about 48 yards.

[Illustration: FIG. 11
CHENILLE DESIGN PAPER CUT UP]

The weaver has to insert by hand the shuttle carrying the required
colour to match the square or squares on the painted strip of design
paper, count the number of shots needed, stop the loom, change the
shuttle and re-start the loom; so that it will be seen that quickness of
eye and dexterity are required.

A mechanical device has been invented for changing the shuttles; but it
is not automatic, and does not appear to present any distinct advantage
over the method of changing by hand; and it can only be employed with a
limited number of colours.

The fabric is beaten up from 12 to 20 shots per inch, according to the
quality of the fur required; but the closer beats up are only suitable
for worsted yarn.

[Illustration: FIG. 12
CHENILLE CLOTH]

The next process is the fur-cutting. The roll of cloth with its
horizontal stripes is taken to the cutting machine, where it is cut into
strips by a series of knives set upon a revolving cylinder, and spaced
so that they sever the woollen weft-threads as the fabric passes over
the cutting bed, and leave the independent strips of fur held together
by the fine cotton warp.

[Illustration: FIG. 13
FUR AFTER CUTTING. CUT AND FOLDED.
TRANSVERSE SECTION SHOWING FUR INSERTED]

Immediately after being cut free, these strips of fur pass over a jet of
steam and a steam-heated cylinder, whose surface is formed with a series
of V-shaped grooves. This has the result of folding upwards the cut ends
of the woollen yarn, and giving a permanent V-shape in section to the
fur. The object of this is that when the fur comes to be woven, its pile
shall all be turned in one direction. The damping of the fur just before
the grooved cylinder is sometimes effected by rollers revolving in a
trough filled with water.

The newly formed fur is then reeled off into individual skeins. It is
marked both with its pattern number and series number, and sorted into
its proper sets.

For a carpet 9 ft. wide beaten up 4 shots per inch, it will be seen that
each inch in the length of the carpet will require no less than 12 yards
of fur weft, so that a strip of fur 48 yards long will only weave 4
inches; and if the repeat of a design be a yard long, 9 series of fur
strips will be needed. The fur strips are, therefore, sorted into their
sets and numbered from 1 to 9 for a 1 yard repeat, or as the case may
be; and are stored in bundles of skeins until required.

We now come to the second part of Chenille manufacture, the weaving up
of the fur into the carpet. This is done on a setting loom, which may be
regarded for the present purpose as normally of a width of 9 ft. or
upwards. This is not saying that Chenille is not woven in narrower
widths, for Chenille is woven in pieces 27 in. and 36 in. wide, and a
very large business is done in rugs of various widths between about the
same limits.

When a carpet is ordered, the fur in bundles of skeins is handed out to
the cop-winder, whose duty it is to wind the skeins on to cops for use
in the setting loom, and to serve them to the weavers in their proper
order. Cops are always the same size, but the length of carpet that a
cop will weave depends, of course, on the width of the carpet.

The setting loom is prepared for work by the threading of ends of warp
from various beams through eyelets carried on gear frames, in much the
same way as in a Brussels or Wilton loom. Indeed, this principle is
common to all woven fabrics, varying only in its application, that is to
say, in the number and arrangement of the warp beams, the yarn employed,
and the pitch.

[Illustration: FIG. 14
SECTION OF CHENILLE AXMINSTER

                          A,  Chenille fur
                          C,  Fur wefts
                          D,  Catcher warp
                          E,  Float warp
                          F,  Stuffer warp
                          G,  Chain
                          H,  Filling weft]

In a typical Chenille carpet, such as that which is beaten up 4 to the
inch, as above mentioned, the pitch of the design will be 12 or 13 per
inch (the beat-up of the weft), and of the sley 7, though, indeed, the
latter is arbitrary, and need bear no relation to the fur. There will be
three warp beams, the catcher beam, the chain beam, and the stuffer
beam. A fourth is often added, called the float. The catcher warp
consists of fine cotton, coloured in some neutral shade, so as to be as
nearly invisible as possible, its function being merely to hold down the
fur weft when it is inserted into the fabric. The chain, or ground warp,
which is generally of jute yarn, is double, and is threaded on to two
gears, which rise and fall alternately as in Brussels. The stuffer or
dead warp, also of jute, runs straight into the fabric, and gives it
substance.

For a 3½ or 4 per inch Chenille carpet, of average quality, two shuttles
will be used, one carrying the jute binding weft, and the other the fur.
There are four picks of jute weft to one of fur, and at the end of the
fifth pick the loom stops automatically with the chain and stuffer
horizontal, and the catcher warp forming a shed, under which the fur has
just been carried. The weavers, two to each wide loom, will then set the
fur, taking care that it matches correctly against the last fur shot,
and that the pile points upwards. They will also lightly comb up the
fur, so that it beds against the last shot, and the catcher threads
settle down neatly through the pile. This done, the loom is re-started:
the first beat of the sley pushes the fur shot home, and the next four
jute shots are put in.

For closer weaves than 4 per inch, two jute weft shots may suffice,
while heavy woollen-backed carpets are produced by the employment of a
shuttle carrying a woollen weft.

In the case of heavy-backed carpets, the double shed is usually
employed, the adjoining chain ends rising alternately, so that they show
on the back in diagonal lines.

The object of a float warp, which rises a little above the level of the
stuffer warp just when the fur shot is being woven, is to support the
fur shot, and give a fuller and more level effect to the carpet.

There is another method of inserting the weft adopted in looms of a
different make, whereby it is carried between the catcher and the other
gears by a travelling arm, which leads the fur from a basket or can in
which it is placed loose. This has the advantage of enabling a long
length of fur to be woven, while it also avoids the crushing of the fur
which results from its being wound on to a cop. With this method the
catcher beam is placed high up in the middle of the loom, and the sley
is made of stronger reeds, open at the top to allow the catcher warp
ends to descend between them.

From the loom the complete carpet passes to the finishing room, where it
is picked back and front, brushed, steamed, combed, and shorn; all these
processes tending to fill out and level the surface. It is then passed
or examined for any defects that may have escaped notice in the first
mending. The ends of the carpet, which are woven without fur, are turned
over and hemmed, preferably by machine. The carpet is then subjected to
a final scrutiny before being swept, rolled, and dispatched to the
packing room or warehouse.

As has been intimated, considerable variety of quality can be obtained
in Chenille Axminster by altering the pitch and thickness of the fur in
the weft loom, or the beat-up in the setting loom. In practice, however,
competition has centred mainly round two standards of quality: one about
12 shots of yarn per inch in the fur, by 3½ or 4 per inch beat-up in the
setting loom; and the other about 14 in the fur and 5 in the setting
loom. Extra qualities, however, are also largely made, and heavy fabrics
which give an excellent imitation of some Oriental carpets.

Chenille carpets have increased enormously in popularity during the past
few years; and the cheaper quality may be considered to have challenged
even Imperial Axminster in the consumer’s favour, and almost to have
become the critical fabric of the industry. The reason for this is not
far to seek. The taste of carpet users all over the world has tended in
recent times more and more in the direction of seamless carpets; while
the demand for piece goods, in body and border, has correspondingly
declined. The evolution of the Chlidema square, woven in 27 in. breadths
with a border matching all round, has been to some extent the cause of
the loss of the piece goods trade; and it succeeded in retaining the
business, though in smaller bulk, for the 3-4 yd. looms, both in
Brussels and Wilton, and later, in a less degree, for tufted Axminster.
But the breadth square has had to give way before the seamless square,
and in particular before the seamless Chenille Axminster square. The
cheap Chenille fabric possesses several marked advantages over Brussels
and Wilton, Tapestry, and even over, tufted Axminster breadth squares.
It is without seam; it gives a comparatively luxurious surface with the
absolute minimum of wool; and it is practically unlimited in colour.
Further, the looms are not expensive to erect and run, and in this
respect the Chenille square has an initial advantage over the seamless
Wilton or tufted Axminster carpets, which necessitate costly and
complicated machinery. On the other hand, it has its disadvantages. It
is not made in a fineness of pitch which admits of effects of design
obtainable readily in Wilton or even in tufted Axminster, while, however
skilful the setting may be, there is an inherent tendency to
irregularity in the pattern, which is apt to offend the critical eye.
Further, in the cheaper qualities, which form the great bulk of the
sale, the wearing qualities do not compare favourably with those of,
say, Imperial Axminster. These disadvantages, however, do not deter that
numerous class of consumers which demands an attractive carpet at a
moderate price.




                               CHAPTER IX
                                TAPESTRY


TAPESTRY is a fabric made alternatively with a looped pile or a cut
pile, which possesses a close affinity to Brussels and Wilton
respectively, in its appearance and texture. In its method of
manufacture, however, it has something in common with Chenille, inasmuch
as it is essentially a two-process fabric, while the pattern is wholly
in the surface, and is the direct result of the preliminary and not of
the weaving process. No Jacquard is used.

In comparison with its nearest competitors, Brussels and Wilton,
Tapestry is simple in construction, and economical in the quantity of
pile yarn consumed, as there is only one pile warp-thread carrying the
pattern, as against four or five threads in the two fabrics named. It
also has the advantage of a practically unlimited range of colours. On
the other hand, Tapestry is expensive in the preparatory processes, and
requires a high degree of technical knowledge and skill.

The underlying principle of the fabric, which was invented by Mr.
Richard Whytock, of Edinburgh, in 1852, is the attainment of the economy
of using one frame of worsted yarn by printing or painting the pattern
on the threads, instead of using five frames, each of a different
colour. Several methods have been tried for printing the pattern on the
warp, such as printing upon the surface either white or dyed, after
weaving; printing the warp threads collectively before weaving; and
printing the warp threads individually. In the two last named cases the
design or part of the design has to be printed in an elongated form to
allow for the reduction caused by the insertion of the wires in weaving.

Modern Tapestry manufacture, however, has practically concentrated upon
the last-named method; so that the others can be disregarded for the
present purpose.

[Illustration: FIG. 15
DESIGN OF TAPESTRY CARPET]

In common with other carpet fabrics, the design for a Tapestry carpet
must be put upon squared paper, which is preferably, at least, of the
actual size. There is no limitation of colour beyond that imposed by
considerations of taste and of expense. The pitch of the carpet varies
from 7 to 9 per inch, and the beat-up about the same; but the average
quality is about 8 each way.

The design having been prepared, it passes to the printers, who are
responsible for colouring the yarns in such a way that they can be
assembled ready for producing the correct pattern in the weaving. As the
warp carries the whole of the pattern, and the different colours of the
design are printed on the warp threads, the design must be read
lengthwise. Each square on the design paper represents a loop of the
warp in the woven carpet.

[Illustration: FIG. 16
DESIGN IN FIG. 15 ELONGATED AS PRINTED]

The length of colour to be printed on the warp thread must, of course,
bear an accurate relation to the height of the wire used and the number
of wires per inch. This is a matter of calculation. The length of yarn
consumed in 1 inch is determined. This length, divided by the number of
wires, or loops per inch, gives the length of warp yarn to be coloured
for each wire. Thus, for a carpet of nine wires to the inch, 3 inches of
warp yarn are required for each inch of the carpet. The length of each
unit of colour to be printed is, therefore, 1/3 in. The mechanism of the
printing drum is adjusted accordingly, and can be varied for different
qualities.

The normal yarn used in Tapestry varies in count from 10s 2 × 2 to 16s 2
× 3 worsted. It is scoured and dried, and then wound from hanks on to
large bobbins. A set of six of these bobbins, or more or less, filled
with the white yarn, is placed vertically on a stand in front of the
printing drum; and the six ends of worsted are attached at equal
intervals to a triple thread of worsted stretched across the width of
the drum. The threads, properly tensioned, pass through guides, and are
wound on to the face of the drum, the guides being mounted on a rod
which is slowly moved laterally in such a manner that the threads are
laid side by side on the surface of the drum. The revolution of the drum
continues until the whole face is covered, or until the required length
of yarn has been wound. In the latter case, fewer bobbins are put on,
and the drum is left partly uncovered. To fill a drum of ordinary size,
then, there will be required 1,176 threads, which will be obtained from
196 revolutions. Each of the six divisions is called a hank, and is tied
separately. Whatever the number of threads and length of the hank, the
whole length of the yarn on the drum represents one warp thread only.

The printing drum is a large roller constructed with a wooden or tin
face supported upon an iron frame and spokes, the central shaft and
external mechanism being carried upon iron framework. Drums are of
various sizes, varying in circumference from 12 ft. 6 in. to 40 ft., and
in width of face from 18 in. to 72 in., capable of carrying from 700 to
1,200 threads side by side. The most usual width is 30 in. The size of
drums is reckoned by the number of “scrolls” or “types,” that is, lines
of colour, they will carry. These are commonly 216, 324, 432, 648, 864,
or 1,072 scrolls; but an average size is 648.

An essential part of the drum is the double row of teeth cut on a metal
edge attached to one of the outer rims of the drum. These are called
indices and are of different pitch, say 648 and 432, corresponding to
one or other of the scrolls. Each tooth is numbered consecutively, all
round the rim; and the indices represent the total number of scrolls
which can be printed, since the pitch of each tooth permits the drum to
revolve just the width of the scroll pulley. A pawl or scotcher is
arranged so as to engage in each tooth and stop the drum when required.
Before printing, the drum is covered with strips of oilcloth, which are
removable.

[Illustration: FIG. 17
PRINTING DRUM, COVERED WITH YARN, PARTLY COLOURED]

The actual printing or painting of the yarn is effected by means of the
scroll pulley, which revolves in a box The arrows show where the repeats
begin containing the colour, the whole being borne by a carriage running
on rails across the width of the drum at the bottom of the frame. The
colours are made up by an expert colourist to match the required shades,
and by the admixture of flour and water are brought to the necessary
consistency, which is about that of a thin paste, so that the colouring
matter is dense enough to adhere, but liquid enough to penetrate the
yarn fibres. In the carriage, the colour roller, which revolves in the
colour, is supported by springs which tend to give it elasticity and
keep it up against the face of the drum. The carriage is drawn across
the drum by a rope which is mechanically actuated, and, of course,
harmonises with the revolution of the drum. At the end of each traverse
of the colour carriage there is a pause, which gives the printer time to
change the pawl into the new tooth of the index at which it is required.

The printer is guided in his selection of colours for each scroll that
he prints by the “scale board” and the “design board.”

Scale boards vary according to the pitch of the design paper, and
according to the length of the design, and the number of times in which
a design repeats in one revolution of the printing drum. Thus, for a
design on squared paper running seven per inch in its length, the scale
board is marked into divisions of seven to the inch throughout its
length, so as to correspond with the horizontal divisions on the design
paper. Supposing a design repeats four times in the whole revolution, a
quarter board is employed; if it repeats twice a half board, the total
number of scrolls being divided into four or two respectively. Thus, if
the size of the drum is 648 scrolls and the number of wires in one
repeat of the pattern is 162, the quarter board will have four vertical
columns of figures, running respectively 1-162, 163-324, 325-486, and
487-648. The scale board has a bevel edge, and is preferably arranged so
that it can be moved over the design board and aligned with the vertical
line of the design which the printer is reproducing.

[Illustration: FIG. 18
SCALE AND DESIGN BOARD COMBINED]

Fig. 18 represents part of a scale and design board combined. The
numbers along the top indicate the threads in the design, and the
printer may be supposed to be ready to print the eighth thread. The
numbers on the right-hand side represent the wires in the carpet, with
which the numbers on the scale board and the scrolls in printing
correspond. The design is 216 wires long; and as the number of scrolls
the drum will take is 648, the design is repeated three times in one
revolution. The scale board is numbered in three columns; and for the
first, second, and third repeats of the design, the printer uses the
first, second, and third divisions on his scale.

To minimise the danger of bad effects from a colour running, the rule is
to begin printing with the lightest shade. In this instance, the
lightest colour is yellow, represented (heraldically) by spots, and it
occurs first at the fourth horizontal line. The printer, therefore,
turns the drum by hand, and puts the pawl in tooth number 4. He then
puts the mechanism in gear and prints the scroll in the manner
described, following on immediately by printing a second scroll at
number 5. He then reads further down the eighth vertical line of the
design, and sees that the colour recurs at 10, 11, 18, 19, 24, and 25.
He therefore puts the pawl in the corresponding teeth of the index
consecutively and prints accordingly. When all the yellow squares
corresponding to the first column of the scale board have been read, he
will take the second column, and print 220, 221, 226, 227, 234, 235,
240, 241 and so on, and then those in the third column. The remaining
colours will then follow on in order of their delicacy.

When the printing of a drum has been completed, the next process is
scraping. The scroll pulley in the act of printing always conveys more
pigment on to the yarn than is needed to colour it, a little wall of
material being left on each side of the path of the roller. This has to
be removed, or it would smudge. This is done by means of small vulcanite
tools, bevelled to a blunt edge, from ½ in. to 2 in. wide, the operator
being aided by a steel bar fixed across the face of the drum as a guide.
Scraping has, however, a further purpose beyond the removal of
superfluous colour, and one no less important; for by skilful pressure
and rubbing, the colour is caused to penetrate more deeply into the
yarn.

[Illustration: FIG. 19
A SCRAPER]

The yarn, having been printed and scraped, has now to be taken off the
drum; a process known as “stripping.” The threads are looped together in
hanks, and numbered with a ticket to show which thread each represents
in the design. The drum is so constructed that a section of it can be
drawn inwards upon a telescopic arm of the drum frame. The yarn is thus
released from its tension round the drum face; and the strippers,
inserting long sticks under the oilcloth, lift it and the yarn clear of
the drum. One side of the frame which carries the drum shaft is made
removable to enable the yarn to be taken away.

The long hanks are then ready for steaming. They are placed with as
little handling as possible upon latticed frames filled with oat-husks.
The frames are then run into an iron-walled steam-chest, which is
securely closed, and into which steam is turned at high pressure. The
effect of the steam pressure and heat is to fix the colours on the yarn.
The operation takes about half an hour. Some makers prefer to put the
hanks into net bags for steaming, or to lay them on network frames,
without the bran. But the first method described is probably the best,
as the bran tends to absorb the superfluous colour, and prevents it from
dripping from one hank on to another.

After steaming, the hanks are thoroughly rinsed, preferably by a large
rocking arm fitted with a hook, in cold running water. The yarn is then
partly dried in a hydro-extractor and finished in a stove. Each hank is
then wound on to large bobbins, which are numbered so that the setters
know to which part of the design each belongs.

[Illustration: FIG. 20
PRINTED THREADS SET FOR WINDING ON TO THE BEAM]

The next process is setting. The object of the operations up to this
point has been to make a set of warp threads which contain the pattern
of the carpet in an elongated form in such a way that, when woven in the
loom, the loops as seen in the carpet will accurately reproduce the
design. It is the business of the setters to arrange the threads
alongside one another in proper order and dressing so that they form the
pattern, and to wind them thus arranged on to the warp beam.

[Illustration: FIG. 21
FIG. 20 AS WOVEN]

The warp beam is at one end of the setting frame; the bobbin-stand,
which moves on pinion feet upon a rack, at the other.

[Illustration: FIG. 22
STRUCTURE OF TAPESTRY CARPET
W, Wires]

The bobbins having been set in proper order on the vertical pegs in the
bobbin frame, the ends from them are led between guide rails, through a
sley, through two halves of a clamp, over the setting table, through
another sley, and a second clamp, on to the warp beam. In the first
instance, the setters hold down the yarn in the clamp next to the warp
beam. They then adjust and manipulate the threads over the setting
table, which is marked with horizontal lines, in accordance with the
pattern.

[Illustration: FIG. 23
MEDIUM TAPESTRY CARPET
A, Chain; B, Pile warp; C, Stuffer warp; E, Weft]

The other clamp is then screwed down, the first one unscrewed, and the
yarn wound on to the beam, the bobbin-stand moving forward along its
rack up to the setting table. This operation is continued until the
whole of the yarn has been wound from the bobbins on to the beam, which
is now ready to be put into the loom and woven.

[Illustration: FIG. 24
TAPESTRY VELVET. 3-SHOT]

The method of weaving is substantially the same as with Brussels; and
except for the pile warp beam, which is generally placed high up at the
back of the loom, and for the absence of a Jacquard, the mechanism of
the loom is not dissimilar. There are three heald-frames: two for the
two halves of the cotton chain, and one for the stuffer and the pile
warp, the jute and worsted being threaded through two eyelets, one below
the other. The Tapestry loom is run at rather a higher speed than the
Brussels, the Moxon or switch principle of wire motion, which is
generally adopted, tending to make this possible. A double stuffer, that
is, two ends of jute, of 14 lb. or 16 lb. count, to each reed, is used
for an average quality; and a treble stuffer where greater weight is
required.

[Illustration: FIG. 25
TAPESTRY VELVET
A, Chain; B, Stuffer warp; C, Pile warp; D, Weft]

Tapestry velvet bears the same relation to the looped fabric as Wilton
does to Brussels, the essential difference being the use of a
knife-ended wire, instead of a round wire. The use of three weft shots
per row of pile is not, however, the almost invariable rule in Tapestry
velvet, that it is in Wilton.

[Illustration: FIG. 26
TAPESTRY VELVET. 2 SHOTS IN THE GROUND]

A three-shot fabric is, of course, more expensive to make than a
two-shot; and there is also the consideration that, unless the pile is
pretty high, the double shot on the top will tend to make the surface
grin. The method, therefore, of using a double shot in the ground is
sometimes adopted. (Fig. 26.)

The Tapestry branch of the carpet trade has naturally passed through a
development similar to that of other makes, in that it has found the
demand passing from piece goods to sewn breadth squares, and from them
to seamless carpets; and it has progressed accordingly. The greater part
of the Tapestry trade at the present time is done in squares, and the
enquiry for carpets 9 ft. and 12 ft. wide seems to be a growing one.
This tendency throws additional burdens on the manufacturer. Square
carpets involve more designing and more printing than piece goods; and
the amount of preparation required is a very serious item. Before one
complete carpet can be produced, preparations have to be made for from
200 to 300, or, in the case of medallions, double the number. That is
one of the disadvantages of the manufacture; a further defect is
inherent in the fabric. However accurately and carefully the processes
of printing, scraping, setting, and weaving may be carried out, the
transition from one colour to another cannot be made quite sudden and
complete. The colour will appear to have run; and the shade which
belongs to one wire will tend to trespass on to the next. This means
that with Tapestry it is never quite possible to produce the
clearly-defined pattern effect, which is produced in Brussels and
Wilton, and which is naturally looked for in all fabrics of moderately
fine pitch.

Apart from this, the Tapestry carpet has much to commend it. It can be
produced and sold at a moderate price; it can be made seamless, and it
has great potentialities of design; while, for those who like plenty of
colour, the range of shades available is practically unlimited.




                               CHAPTER X
                                INGRAIN


THE kind of carpet that is variously called Kidderminster, Scotch, or
Ingrain, differs considerably from any of the carpets hitherto
described. Perhaps essentially, and in regard to texture, it is most
akin to hand-woven Tapestry, having a flat ribbed surface, without tufts
like Axminster or loops like Brussels.

[Illustration: FIG. 27
TWO-PLY IN WARP AND WEFT. SECTION THROUGH WARP

                A & B, Warp threads of different colours
                X & Y, Wefts of corresponding colours]

The original type of this carpet was the Ingrain or “Two-ply Super.” It
was made with a worsted warp traversed by a woollen weft, and was woven
in pieces 1 yd. wide. The worsted warp was coloured generally to match
the weft, for which two, three, or four shuttles were employed. The
design and colour effect depended upon the working of the weft, though
the incidental appearance on the surface of the warp threads, which were
harmonious or neutral in shade, did not disturb the pattern. There were
1,088 warp ends for a full super warp to the 36 in. width of fabric, two
to each reed, equal to 544, or a pitch of about 15 per inch; while the
beat-up contained 14 pairs of weft to the inch, that is, 14 above and 14
below. This fineness of pitch and beat-up admitted of delicate and
ambitious designing, and of clever and artistic effects in spite of the
limitation of colours. The writer has seen an American Ingrain carpet,
date about 1893, representing the landing of Columbus, which was
admirably drawn and shaded, and at a little distance might easily have
been mistaken for a hand-made Tapestry.

The Ingrain carpet was made in large quantities at one time in the 36
in. width in Scotland, the North of England, and in the United States,
but is more or less obsolete at the present time, having given way
before other types.

Developments have been in various directions, different manufacturers
having pursued different improvements in looms or in textures; but the
tendency of the development has been mainly in the direction of rather
heavier fabrics and wider looms. There are at least as many as twenty
different qualities in this branch of the carpet trade at the present
time, varying from each other in more or less important particulars. It
must suffice, however, to describe one or two of the fabrics,
illustrating variations of the Ingrain principle, the original type of
which has been indicated above.

Of recent years there has been a considerable demand for plain colours,
and these can be made either in the twill or the plain weave. In these
fabrics both warp and weft are dyed, with the object of obtaining a
solid effect. For a twill, four gears are required; but the plain or
“Oatmeal” surface can be obtained from two.

For two-colour effects, there are double warps, one of each colour, each
warp working with the weft of the same shade. A two-ply carpet is thus
formed in such a way that the design shows on each surface but with the
colours reversed.

Alternatively, a two-colour effect can be produced from wefts of two
shades only, working with a black or neutral chain, the pattern being
obtained entirely from the appearance on the surface, above the chain,
of the dyed weft.

[Illustration: FIG. 28
TWO-PLY WARP AND WEFT; 4 COLOURS IN EACH

              Warps: A, Black; B, Red; C, White; D, Olive
              Wefts: A, Black; B, Red; C, White; D, Olive]

Where a more ambitious colour effect is desired, four warps, each of a
different colour, can be employed instead of two pairs. These, combined
in different ways with four wefts of various colours, obviously give
scope for a great variety of shade and design.

[Illustration: FIG. 29
THREE-PLY WARP AND TWO-PLY WEFT. SECTION THROUGH WARP
A, Black stuffer warp; B, C, D, E, Coloured warps; W, X, Y, Z, Wefts of
  same colours as B, C, D, E]

The so-called Art Squares—not a very satisfactory name—are generally
made with two coloured warps, one cotton chain, and one jute stuffer
beam. The design is operated, as, of course, in many other kinds of
loom, by a Jacquard mechanism. The blanks or perforations in the pattern
cards cause some of the chain threads to be lifted up while others are
left down, the space between them forming the shed, through which the
shuttle passes, carrying the weft. Where the chain ends only are lifted,
the weft will show; where the stuffer is raised, it will cover the weft.
There may be three or four shuttles, each carrying a different coloured
weft, and one or other of the wefts will appear on the surface of the
carpet all along the shot, while the remainder will remain hidden.
Sometimes one shuttle carries a cotton weft.

In some weaves the black stuffer is occasionally brought to the surface
so as to obtain an additional effect, or, alternatively, a two-colour
chain warp is employed, without a stuffer.

[Illustration: FIG. 30
THREE-PLY WARP AND WEFT
A, B, C, D, E, F, Coloured warps; U, V, W, X, Y, Z, Coloured wefts]

A more complicated variety of weave can be made with three sets of warp
threads, each of two colours, alternately, and six wefts correspondingly
coloured. This produces a fabric of three textures, which are fastened
to each other at the point of interchange. If, therefore, the design
should involve a large area of one colour or effect, this area is apt to
be loose and baggy, covering a pocket, which is not attached to the rest
of the fabric. This defect, however, can be overcome by utilising one of
the warps or wefts to act as a binding thread.

As has been intimated above, modern developments of Ingrain carpets have
tended in the direction of wide seamless carpets, in which respect the
fabric is on the same lines as other classes of carpeting. The bulk of
the trade now lies in the wide carpets, and comparatively few breadth
goods are woven. The modern Art Square loom is a fine piece of
mechanism, inspiring admiration with its comparatively small Jacquard,
its mass of cordage, and its ingenious co-ordinated motions.

Modern developments of fabrics have also been in the direction of
heavier goods and coarser pitches. Most qualities now being made contain
1,088 warp ends to the yard, in stuffer and chain combined. The yarn now
used is heavier, as it has been realised that a carpet needs weight,
both for the sake of wearing qualities, and in order that it may lie
well on the floor.

The preliminary and final processes in the manufacture of Ingrain
carpets are substantially the same, as regards winding, beaming,
finishing, etc., as for other fabrics; and these have been already
described. Mention may be made, however, of a warping mill for preparing
the warp beams for wide carpets. The yarns are wound from bobbins fixed
in a frame, in some convenient multiple of the number of ends required,
on to a large reel frame or warping mill, which revolves on either a
vertical or horizontal axis. This frame has a diameter of about 12 ft.,
so as to enable a long length of warp to be wound upon it. When the
required number of ends of the desired lengths have been wound, they are
unwound from the reel on to a beam, which can be fitted into the beaming
machine, and detached again, so as to go into the loom. The beaming
machine is adjustable to take different widths of beam.

Compared with some carpet fabrics, Ingrain must take a modest place. The
effects of design and colour of which it is capable are limited; and
though, in theory, the combination of three or four wefts, with as many
warps of similar or different colours, gives an almost indefinite
potential number of colour combinations, yet in practice these have
their limits. It will be generally conceded that Ingrain carpets are
most effective in simple and severe designs, using few colours. Nor can
it claim to be a luxurious carpet to tread upon. Even the heaviest
Ingrain lacks the resiliency, which the looped pile gives to even a
cheap Brussels or Tapestry. On the other hand, it can be very artistic
within its limitations; and it has the merit of being made in wide
seamless carpets, and of these carpets being clean in wear and easily
handled.




                               CHAPTER XI
                           DESIGN AND COLOUR


CARPET designing is a branch of Applied Art which makes exacting demands
upon its adherents, requiring as it does technical knowledge to an
exceptional extent. The average designer who ventures into this field,
however high his artistic ability may be, is not likely to achieve a
practical success, unless and until he has studied the particular
capacities and limitations of carpet fabrics. For this reason, the
public carpet designer is more or less of a specialist in his domain,
which is rarely invaded unless by such exceptional craftsmen as the late
Walter Crane or Voysey. Similarly, and because there are so many
varieties of carpet fabrics, requiring special knowledge and treatment,
all carpet manufacturers maintain private staffs of designers, whose
business it is to produce new patterns for each season and quality in
accordance with the commercial requirements. For the manufacturer has to
be governed to a great extent by the tastes and inclinations of his
customers, the carpet dealers, and cannot afford to be too enterprising
in initiating novelties, while the carpet dealer, in his turn is, as a
rule, rather a follower than a leader of the public taste. The
commercial standard has, therefore, been to some extent a hampering
influence upon the progress of carpet design towards perfection, but it
is certainly less so than in the past. For it has been modified of
recent years by a new tendency, which, however, is not one of unmixed
advantage to the manufacturer.

This tendency may be expressed as the intervention of the consumer.
Scarcity of materials during the war, and the consequent obligation of
carpet dealers to accept what they can get from manufacturers has,
temporarily at any rate, modified the influence of the individual buyer
of carpets upon carpet design and colour; but previous to the war it had
become a factor to be reckoned with. There were, and are, many
householders possessed of definite ideas upon arrangement of design,
combination of colour, and harmony of decoration; and these ideas often
germinate in suggestions or demands conveyed through the dealer to the
manufacturer for single carpets of special colouring or arrangement.
Often these suggestions prove to be more original than effective; but
often they lead to effects both artistic and saleable.

This critical and creative spirit on the part of the individual is not,
therefore, to be despised by the technical expert. It encourages
novelty, and tends towards the evolution of new ideas in design and
colour, and a liberation from an excessive dominance of the commercial
standard.

From whatever source, however, the carpet manufacturer obtains his ideas
for a design, it is by his expert staff, or by a professional carpet
designer, that the ideas must be reduced to a practical form. And the
technical preparation of designs for carpets is as full of difficulty as
it is of interest. As has been indicated, the various makes of carpet
differ from each other in many respects, including that of pitch, or
number of threads or rows per inch. They all, however, have this in
common, that, anatomically so to speak, as regards design, they are
reducible to squares of colour. For this reason, ruled or point paper is
always employed in the preparation of the design, and preferably paper
ruled so as to represent the full size of the woven fabric. The
designer, therefore, may not represent the curved outline of a leaf, for
instance, with a bold sweep of his brush, but must paint it carefully,
square by square, leaving actually an outline, which is more or less
jagged according to the coarseness or fineness of the pitch. Here, at
once we recognise a limitation which is apt to be irksome to the
untrained designer of carpets. And what applies to form applies also to
colour. There is no imperceptible graduation of shade to be achieved.
Each particular square has to be of one colour and no more. Again, the
designer must consider the number of colours he is allowed to employ, be
they two or a hundred; and must know whether they can be used anywhere
or only in restricted places in the pattern. Then there is the
consideration of the repeat, with the mysteries of the straight match,
reverse, drop and half drop; of the width of the fabric, body and
border; and of the various adjustments of design required for carpets of
different sizes, whether breadth goods, Chlidema squares, medallions, or
seamless. Last, there is the real artistic imagination that is required;
the art of seeing from one repeat how a complete carpet will look, of
estimating the difference in appearance between the flat colour on the
paper and the richness of the wool; of the variation in value of the
same shade in collocation with this or with that. From the above it will
be seen that the successful carpet designer has to be both craftsman and
artist.

The finished coloured design passes into the hands of the colourist,
who, whatever be the nature of the subsequent manufacturing process,
will have the responsibility of selecting the coloured yarns to go into
the fabric. These will normally, in the first instance, follow the main
lines of the shades of the design paper. Then the travellers’ samples
are made; and in some fabrics even, where pattern making is not
practicable, whole carpets or sets of carpets are produced. Some idea
can thus be obtained of the expenses to which carpet manufacturers are
put in the preparation of new designs and colourings (which, in pre-war
times, used to be done annually, and even more often) before a yard of
carpet is sold to recoup them.

The carpet designer and colourist must have strict regard for the
limitations of his medium, and in particular the limitations of pitch
and of colour. He must know how to employ in the most effective manner,
thirty shades or three, and what treatment is best for a floral design
or an Oriental, in a fine or a coarse pitch.

Of course, the same laws of colour harmonies and contrasts hold good for
the carpet colourist, as for the artist in any other branches of applied
art; but the carpet artist has his own particular problems, such as
those that have been indicated, and such as arise, for instance, from
the fact that carpets have wool surfaces and lie on the floor, and
therefore bear quite a different relation to the decoration of a room
than curtains or ceilings.

Carpet colourings, apart from plains, may be analysed into self-colour
effects, two-colour effects, and effects of three or more colours.

Self-colour or tone-on-tone effects adapt themselves more easily to a
scheme of decoration than carpets containing contrasted colours. It
seems to be a fact that the carpet is about the last thing to be thought
of in a scheme of decoration. It need not be discussed whether it ought
to be so or not. The walls, curtains, tiles, etc., are decided upon
before the question of the colour of the carpet arises. In such a case,
if a harmonious effect is to be ensured, there may be little choice left
in the matter; and a self-coloured carpet may be either the easiest way
out of the difficulty, or an artistic necessity. Certainly it is easier
to furnish to; and, if it does mean a certain want of ambition in the
decorative scheme, it is simple and satisfying.

Self-coloured carpets are also eminently suitable for small rooms,
especially bed-rooms, on the one hand, and for theatres and music halls
on the other, perhaps because one colour is more restful than several.

The number of shades used varies from two to five, according to the
simplicity or boldness of the design. More than five are certainly
undesirable, as it becomes impossible to get steps of shades without
approaching a white at the top and a black at the bottom; and, indeed,
some of the most effective self-colours are made in three shades only.

Two-tone effects of contrasted colours are not greatly used. They are
sometimes employed in small designs, with two colours only, or three
(one and a contrasting pair), but more often in bold designs of the
Empire, Adam, or Wedgwood style, with three or four shades of one
colour, upon a ground, or working against a pair of shades, of another;
but effective combinations on these lines are rare.

By far the largest proportion of carpets made are multi-coloured; and
nearly every style and fabric is adaptable to treatment in this way.

It is impossible to deal properly with the question of many-coloured
carpets except at great length; but, as a basis, it may be useful to
remember that there are only three primary colours, and that in every
multi-coloured carpet there should be represented some red, some yellow,
and some blue. That is not saying that these should be primaries. The
red may be a terra-cotta, the yellow a tan, the blue a slate. But if you
have forty shades in a carpet they can all (except, of course, black and
white) be scientifically analysed into reds, yellows, and blues, even if
some of them are secondaries or tertiaries. That is to say, that,
according to its collocation, a purple will be acting either as a blue
or as a red, a green either as a yellow or as a blue, and so on. It
follows, therefore, that in practice the carpet designer or colourist
who has a large range of colours at his disposal will arrange them in
sets: a tan with a cream, three blues, two reds and a ruby, and so on.

From this point of view, the manufacturer of Wilton is not so hopelessly
outclassed by the maker of Axminster and Chenille. With his five or six
colours, irrespective of planting, he can produce an effect which is
satisfying, and artistically perfect; though he may have to use one
shade, where two or three would give additional softness and richness.

Much, however, depends on the nature of the design; and it is obvious
that if it is desired to represent, say, a flower in a naturalistic
manner, the fabric that commands a large number of colours, combined
with a reasonably fine pitch, will come off best.

A dictum of that eminent art-critic, Owen Jones, may perhaps be
appropriately quoted at this point. In a lecture on Decorative Art he
writes—

“Carpets should be darker in tone and more broken in line than any
portion of a room, both because they present the largest mass of colour,
and because they serve as a background to the furniture placed upon
them. As a general rule, lighter carpets may be used in rooms thinly
furnished than the contrary, as we should otherwise have too
overpowering a mass of shade.”

All ornament, according to the source and principle of its design, may
be classified as either geometric, naturalistic, or conventional.
Ornament of the first class consists of apparently arbitrary
arrangements of circles, squares, spirals, or intersecting lines, or
repetitions of simple figures. It is the natural form of expression of
primitive art, as employed by savages or found on prehistoric remains;
but it has been developed in some style, as, for example, the Moorish,
into elaborate and beautiful patterns. Naturalistic ornament is that
which is closely based upon natural objects, especially flowers and
leaves, which are coloured as closely as the limitations of the material
permit. Conventional ornament, which may probably be regarded as the
highest class, is based upon observation of nature; but the natural
forms are not slavishly copied, but conventionalised, in the sense of
being selected and simplified, and adapted to the decorative purpose in
view.

This classification holds good of carpet design, as for other domains of
applied art; and it may be interesting to trace the development of the
fashion of carpet decoration with this classification in view.

The geometric style is characteristic of the youthful days of British
carpets, and was at its zenith in Early Victorian times. Designs of this
class, rather elaborate than simple in drawing, were associated with
bright and strongly contrasted colours, while black grounds, at once the
most effective and the most difficult of all ground shades, were greatly
in vogue. It is interesting to note that of late we have returned to the
use of black, for many years an outlaw colour; though it is employed now
in a more artistic manner than it was sixty years ago.

With the later Victorian times is associated the development of the
naturalistic style in carpets as in other decorative fabrics; flowers,
singly or in bouquets, being depicted in bright colours as near to
Nature as the technical limitations permitted. This style may perhaps be
regarded as flourishing until gradually checked or sobered by
conventionalising influences, and notably that of William Morris, to
whom, indeed, it is not too much to attribute a revolution in the
decorative point of view. But this revolution was both slow and partial;
and the naturalistic style, founded, as it is no doubt, upon a love of
Nature innate in man, is too deeply rooted ever to lose its popularity
completely.

It is still with us. And why not? Flowers, though not meant to be
trodden under foot, are round about our feet; and they make a double
appeal to the carpet designer of intrinsic beauty, and of fitness for
ground decoration. A green ground carpet with pink roses, as near as may
be to life, represents no doubt something of the aspiration of the
dweller in town for the country; and who shall say that it is unworthy?

Owen Jones is again worth quoting in this connection, even if his
strictures seem excessively severe. He says—

“I will say no more on the floral style, but to express a regret that,
the more perfect the manufacturing process in carpets becomes, the more
do they (the carpets) appear to lend themselves to evil. The modest
Kidderminster carpet rarely goes wrong, because it cannot; it has to
deal with but two colours, and consequently much mischief is beyond its
reach. The Brussels carpet, which deals with five colours, is more
mischievous. The Tapestry carpet, where the colours are still more
numerous, are vicious in the extreme; whilst the recent invention of
printed carpets, with no bounds to its ambition, has become positively
criminal.”

But the supremacy of the naturalistic style long since passed away, and
gave place towards the end of last century to the conventional, There
was a very definite movement in this direction, arising perhaps in the
first instance from the Morris influence, but carried forward notably by
_The Studio_, the Arts and Crafts Exhibition, and by such artists as C.
F. A. Voysey, Walter Crane, G. C. Haité, Arthur Silver, and many others.

The conventional style is particularly suitable to carpets, in that it
possesses great decorative possibilities, and continually reminds the
occupant of a room of beautiful objects in Nature, without deliberately
challenging, as in the naturalistic style, comparisons, which can only
be disadvantageous. This style reached the summit of its popularity
about the first years of the century and has since declined, though it
is by no means extinct. Its decline may be regretted, if only for the
reason that it is one of the very few styles of design in carpets which
can claim to be distinctly British.

It left behind it a successor, however, which enjoyed a few years of
public favour. This is the tapestry or verdure style, wherein flowers,
fruit, and leaves are treated in a half-conventional manner, generally
on a well-covered ground. This really stands half-way between the
naturalistic and the conventional styles. It may be the joint offspring
of the two, a more exuberant Morris type, or a more chastened floral
chintz; while it seems not unlikely that it was introduced from Germany,
where it was certainly very popular at one time.

Then we passed into an era of reproductions. Examples of masterpieces of
decoration, and especially those of Oriental art, have always, and
rightly, been studied by carpet designers, and frequently reproduced by
carpet manufacturers in the past; but never to such an extent as during
the years preceding the war. The carpet trade of that time was dominated
by the cult of the antique Eastern carpet; and a very large proportion
of the production of British carpets was upon Persian and Indian styles,
while subsequently the Chinese came in for marked attention. From one
point of view, this was all to the good; for the birthplace of the
carpet was the Orient, and old Eastern carpets are classics, just as the
works of Homer, Vergil, Handel, or Velasquez are classics. Competition
among manufacturers was keen; and close and beautiful reproductions of
the best antique Oriental carpets were offered to the public,
distinguished in design, soft in colouring, and lending themselves
readily to harmonious schemes of decoration.

But from another aspect this era was less satisfactory. The masterpieces
of Persia and Asia Minor, so eagerly sought out, were not studied as
models, to be adapted to modern ideas and requirements, as inspirations,
or bases for new effects. They were apt to be slavishly copied, line for
line and shade for shade, as far as the limitations of the machine-made
fabric permitted. A manufacturer would boast: “This is an exact
reproduction of the famous carpet of so-and-so, made in the fourteenth
century”; not: “This is a beautiful carpet. Persian in feeling.” This
sort of thing did not make for progress, nor for originality and
initiative in the design, but led to a certain monotony and arrested
progress, though the beauty of the productions was incontestable.

The next stage in the development of carpet design was very interesting.
A slight, but inevitable reaction set in against the dominance of close
reproductions of Persian and other carpets of the Near East. Carpets in
the characteristic decorative styles of other countries, and of other
ages, were attempted. The Far East furnished the first departure from
the Persian domination; and the rich stores of Chinese and Japanese
ornament were drawn upon, with very satisfactory results. Then the
carpet manufacturer and designer struck out more boldly, and invaded any
land or period whose particular style of decoration could be converted
to the artistic purposes of the industry. Louis XIV, Louis XVI, Rococo,
Italian Renaissance, Empire, Adam, Georgian, Queen Anne, and other
periods were laid under contribution; and it was no less a clear demand
on the part of the dealer and the public (to whose share due credit must
be given) than a point of honour with the manufacturer, that every
design should be pure and true to its particular style. This involved
knowledge and study, and tended to restore the designer and colourist to
his proper position as a creative artist from that of a mere copyist, to
which he had been in some danger of sinking.

The Futurist, Cubist, Vorticist movement, whatever its effect has been
in the world of Fine Art, has had but little influence upon carpet
design and colour. But perhaps this is yet to come.

There has been one more stage in the development of carpet design, which
may be regarded as a part of, but slightly different from, the
period-study stage. This may be called the Archaeological. The art of
Greece and Rome, apart from the superb acanthus scroll, has left little
that lent itself to carpet decoration; but older civilisations have been
drawn upon; and the finely conventionalised ornament of Ancient Egypt,
Chaldea, and Assyria, has been utilised in harmonious and dignified
carpets. Nor is this tendency likely to be arrested, as long as fresh
fields can be found that will repay exploration.

All this is extremely healthy and stimulating for the industry. It
involves study and effort and originality; and it makes for real
progress. The consumer of carpets has been growing more discriminating,
just as he has been growing more eclectic. His taste is varied: he may
buy a Hamadan design or a Celtic; but he will want it pure in style, and
well coloured. He is interested in a little archaeology; but he likes a
sound design better than archaeology, and finds a good colouring more
important still.

What developments the future holds in store it is impossible to say. It
may be that we shall have a reaction from this, eclecticism, this
cosmopolitanism of taste, to a more insular vogue; that we shall even
evolve a Twentieth Century British style in carpets as characteristic as
the Egyptian or the Renaissance.

Meanwhile, some indication has been given of the steps by which the
carpet trade has reached the high and varied standard of excellence in
design and colour which it enjoys to-day.




                              CHAPTER XII
                               STATISTICS


THE British carpet manufacturing trade cannot claim to compare in size
with the larger industries of the country; but the figures which follow
will give some measure of its extent. It should be premised that, owing
to the disturbance of the industry caused by war conditions, it is
necessary to go back to 1913 to obtain figures which can be regarded as
approximately normal.

There are forty-five firms engaged in the manufacture of carpets, of
whom eleven are located in Scotland, nine in the North of England,
eighteen in Kidderminster and district, and seven in other parts of the
country. Kidderminster is thus, both in the number of manufacturers, and
in its productive capacity, the most important centre of the trade.

There are about 4,500 looms of various kinds and widths in the whole
trade, of which number Brussels and Wilton looms, Chenille, and Tapestry
each contribute about 25 per cent., Axminster 17½ per cent., and
Ingrain, hand-tufted, and sundry looms the balance.

The total number of employees in the trade before the war was 36,000, of
which rather more than one-quarter were male. During the war the total
was reduced to about 50 per cent.

The average annual consumption of wool may be taken as about 8,000 tons;
which, estimating a fleece as about 6lb. in weight, represents the wool
produced yearly by 3,000,000 sheep.

The consumption of jute was from 15,000 to 20,000 tons; of cotton about
13,000 tons; of linen 8,000 to 10,000 tons; and of coal about 100,000
tons per annum.

The export trade is an important branch, as will be seen from the
following tables for 1913 and 1918, printed here by the courtesy of the
_Kidderminster Shuttle_—


                             CARPET EXPORTS

       (In the following details of Carpets, Rugs are included.)

                  _Quantities for Twelve Months ended_—
                            _December, 1912._ _December, 1913._
       Germany                        122,400            91,200
       Netherlands                    339,100           402,300
       Belgium                         68,900            55,200
       France                          71,900            63,700
       Spain and Canaries              71,300            47,300
       United States                  142,000           137,300
       Chili                          419,400           338,700
       Argentine Republic             391,500           409,000
       Australia                    1,704,700         1,821,300
       New Zealand                    555,400           521,500
       Canada                       2,730,300         2,569,300
       Other Countries              2,194,900         2,146,100
                                         ————              ————
       Total Square Yards           8,811,800         8,602,900


                             CARPET EXPORTS

                    _Value for Twelve Months ended_—
                            _December, 1912._ _December, 1913._
                                       £                 £
       Germany                         37,982            27,853
       Netherlands                     60,161            72,544
       Belgium                         11,009             9,858
       France                          18,455            17,757
       Spain and Canaries              16,569             8,193
       United States                   55,634            60,688
       Chili                           54,809            50,938
       Argentine Republic              72,879            72,027
       Australia                      296,664           334,137
       New Zealand                     89,972            91,110
       Canada                         450,119           449,101
       Other Countries                341,277           342,718
                                        —————             —————
       TOTAL                       £1,505,530        £1,536,924


                             CARPET EXPORTS

                  _Quantities for Twelve Months ended_—
                            _December, 1917._ _December, 1918._
       Netherlands                    280,300             1,000
       France                         113,200           183,100
       Spain and Canaries              54,600            32,300
       United States of               298,900            89,900
       America
       Chile                          114,100           152,200
       Argentine Republic             228,000           218,900
       Australia                      851,800           852,500
       New Zealand                    222,100            97,700
       Canada                         886,900           239,800
       Other Countries              1,482,900         1,151,000
                                        —————             —————
       Total Square Yards           4,532,800         3,018,400


                             CARPET EXPORTS

                    _Value for Twelve Months ended_—
                            _December, 1917._ _December, 1918._
                                       £                 £
       Netherlands                     88,307               502
       France                          55,368           120,982
       Spain and Canaries              17,008            14,803
       United States of               190,572            71,790
       America
       Chile                           30,076            63,512
       Argentine Republic              71,915            95,237
       Australia                      237,634           330,287
       New Zealand                     58,937            36,260
       Canada                         206,658            70,120
       Other Countries                418,432           470,898
                                        —————             —————
       TOTAL                       £1,374,907        £1,274,391


                             CARPET IMPORTS

                                    _Square_   _Value._
                                     _Yds._      _£_
              Imports of Carpets    1,854,599    687,026
                and Carpet Rugs,
                1912
              Imports of Carpets    1,965,000    698,371
                and Carpet Rugs,
                1913




                              CHAPTER XIII
                         EMPLOYERS AND EMPLOYED


CARPET manufacture, as already explained in the foregoing pages,
comprises a good many different processes and fabrics; and it can be
readily understood that the making of Wilton carpets, for instance, may
require not only a different plant and staff from those needed for
Ingrain or Axminster, but even a different manufacturing and selling
policy. From these and other considerations it comes about that, in
practice, carpet manufacturers are inclined to specialise in one fabric,
and to restrict themselves to making two or three, though this is not to
be regarded as by any means an invariable rule. As a result, the
interest in any one fabric will be found to be confined to a limited
number of manufacturers, and not to be extended over the whole trade;
while nearly all manufacturers are interested in more than one fabric.

In default of any general association of carpet manufacturers, the
tendency in the past has been for the whole or the large majority of
manufacturers interested in a fabric to form an Association for the
control of qualities and prices in that fabric only. Thus, A, B, C, and
D make Axminster carpets and form an Axminster Association; B, C, D, and
E are members of a Brussels and Wilton Association; A, C, E, and F of a
Tapestry Association, and so on.

As a matter of fact, there have been in existence for a good many years
a Brussels and Wilton Carpet Manufacturers’ Association, working in
close co-operation with an Axminster Association, and a Victorian
(Chenille) Association; while the makers of Tapestry carpets have an
organisation of their own. Of recent years, another body was added, the
Carpet Manufacturers’ Federation, whose special function was the control
of the lower qualities of Brussels and Wilton, which the existing
Brussels and Wilton Association did not claim to regulate.

The organisations enumerated comprise the large majority of the makers
of the various carpet fabrics concerned; and they have controlled the
prices and terms obtaining in the trade on the whole in a very effective
manner, though subject always to the somewhat disturbing influence of
the manufacturers remaining outside the Associations. Of these, however,
the greater number have habitually followed the standard of prices and
selling conditions set by the Associations.

On the whole, then, these trade organisations have done good work.
Certainly they cannot be accused of greediness in advancing prices too
quickly or too much, or of undue stringency in conditions of sale. The
value and amount of control exercised by these Associations have been
partly conditioned by their mutual relations. Intercommunication between
the different bodies and joint meetings has already contributed to the
solution of some difficulties common to the trade; but more might be
done in this direction. No doubt an ideal organisation would be an
Association of the whole industry, with sections for each branch of it.

The work of the Associations has included the standardisation of a
certain number of qualities in various fabrics; and, indeed, without
such standardisation the fixing of prices in a satisfactory manner is
almost an impossibility. In the interests of all concerned, including,
it may be confidently asserted, both the carpet dealer and the ultimate
consumer, this standardisation, coupled with a reduction in the number
of qualities produced, might very well be extended. The trade has been
unnecessarily complicated in the past by the existence of qualities
differing from each other by a small percentage of value, and puzzling
to the buyer. Carpet manufacturers are themselves partly to blame for
this multiplication of fabrics, the outcome of an extravagant
competition, involving needless expense in production, which fell, of
course, ultimately upon the consumer. War conditions have made a clean
sweep of many of them: it is to be hoped that they will not recur.

The carpet industry was from the first a great sufferer from the state
of affairs brought about by the declaration of war. In the early days,
cancels and a suspension of orders necessitated a recourse to short
time; while later, as a so-called “Luxury Trade,” it did not seem likely
to meet with much consideration at the hands of the authorities in
respect of protection given to its personnel, or of the provision of
adequate raw materials. These difficulties brought carpet manufacturers
closer together than before; and committees representing the whole trade
were formed for the protection of its interests in the above
connections.

Ultimately, when the question of the rationing of wool and other raw
materials necessary to the industry became paramount, a Committee of the
trade was formed, entitled the Carpet Trade Rationing Committee. This
Committee was recognised by the War Office, and responsible directly to
the Wool Control Board. Since June, 1917, it was occupied with the
allocation of wool to spinners, and of worsted and woollen yarns, and
subsequently jute, to carpet manufacturers. The distribution, of course,
depended upon the amount allotted to the carpet trade by the Wool
Control Board, and had to be made with due regard to the needs of carpet
manufacturers, their pre-war consumption, their stocks, etc. It was an
arduous and invidious task; and the fact that it was carried through
with scarcely a complaint, and that, in spite of severe shortage of
material at times, no firm was ever obliged to shut down, reflects great
credit on all concerned.

Labour was represented on this Committee by one member from each branch
of the Carpet Trade Unions, in Scotland, the North of England, and
Kidderminster.

The publication of the Whitley Report brought general recognition that
effective co-operation of employers and employed was a necessity for the
future prosperity of the carpet industry, no less than for other trades,
and that this could best be brought about by an organisation as fully
representative of the employers as the Affiliation of Carpet Trade
Unions was of the employees.

At the beginning of 1918 a scheme was put forward by the late Sir
Charles Bine Renshaw for the formation of a British Carpet
Manufacturers’ Association for the whole trade, composed of delegates
from three District Associations, representing the Scottish, North of
England, and Kidderminster Area Carpet Manufacturers respectively. The
object of these Associations was the protection of the general interests
of the trade, and in particular the settlement of questions of wages and
employment in co-operation with accredited representatives of Carpet
Trade Unions. The Scottish Manufacturers were the first to form their
District Association, but were followed in due course by those of the
other two areas.

The Trade Unions of the carpet industry were naturally local in origin.
The Midland branch was founded in 1866, under the title “The
Kidderminster and Stourport United Brussels Power Loom Carpet Weavers’
Friendly Society.” In 1868, the name was altered to “The Power Loom
Carpet Weavers’ Mutual Defence and Provident Association,” though
generally spoken of as the Carpet Weavers’ Association; and this title
held good until 1917, when the textile workers, both male and female,
were admitted to membership, and the name was finally altered to “The
Power Loom Carpet Weavers’ and Textile Workers’ Association.”

The original headquarters of the Society was the Vine Inn, Horsefair;
but in 1870 a room was rented from the Workmen’s Club, at 28 Church
Street, where the business was carried on up to 1887. In this year the
Association was transferred to 105 Mill Street, where it has remained
until its recent move next door, to No. 106.

Although the original _raison d’être_ of the organisation was that of a
Trade Defence Association, it very soon took up what is known as
Friendly Society work; for as early as 1867 accident and funeral
benefits were being paid; sick pay was commenced in 1868; and in 1877 it
was decided to use funds for superannuation claims. It is interesting to
record that at the beginning of 1919 there were 52 members on the
superannuation list, including some of the men who helped to found the
Association, such as Noah Cooke (85), Thomas Thatcher (95), B. Barber,
and several others now well advanced in years.

The Association has gradually extended the scope of its benefits to
members until we find that, for the year ending December, 1917, out of
an income of £1,717 0s. 8d. no less than £1,391 19s. 10d. was disbursed
in Friendly Society benefits, subscriptions, and donations.

The following figures, showing the total amounts paid out for benefits
to the sick and disabled, for superannuation, and for funerals, will
convey some idea of the great extent of the activity of the Society in
this direction since its formation—

                                       £     s.  d.
                    Sick Pay         26,638  18   1
                    Superannuation   17,223   0   9
                    Funerals          8,558  17   2

In addition to these amounts, various sums have been applied to other
useful purposes. For instance, in the year 1897, £221 was spent in
assisting members who were unemployed, and in succeeding years several
smaller amounts have been spent in the same way. Over £130 was
distributed in 1906 to members who wished to emigrate, and later about
£100 for the same purpose.

Thanks to the good relations which have subsisted between employers and
employed, and which it is to be hoped will continue, the amount spent in
trade disputes has been very small.

During the most flourishing days of the Brussels and Wilton trade, the
actual number of members on the books reached 1,600. This gradually fell
to 800, including superannuated members, in the early part of 1917. In
that year, however, the rules were altered to admit the textile workers
to membership; and the number on the books at the beginning of 1919 was
rather over 3,000.

The Association has a long and honourable record to look back upon. It
has played a useful part in the industrial life of the community, it has
treated its members well, and has earned the respect of the
manufacturers. No doubt, under the new conditions, it will do no less
well in the future.

The Northern Counties Carpet Trades Association was established in 1892
by a few enthusiasts at Halifax, under the title of “The Halifax
Brussels Carpet Weavers’ Association.” Membership was confined to those
working as Jacquard weavers until June, 1904, when the name was changed
to “The Northern Counties Power Loom Weavers’ Association,” making it
possible to accept as members all power-loom weavers. A further
alteration was made in the title and constitution in 1913, when the
Association was registered under its present name, since when it has
accepted as members any person engaged in the industry. The Association
has branches at Halifax, Sowerby Bridge, Heckmondwike, Rochdale, and
Manchester, with a membership of approximately 1,200. Up to the end of
1918 the Association has disbursed in provident benefits the following
amounts—

                                        £    s.  d.
                   Death                236   0   0
                   Playing for Work   3,887  17   3
                   Out of Work          456  18   2
                   Grants               246   9   0
                   Emigration Grants    260  18   4
                   Sick Pay             266   0   3

Payment of sick pay was discontinued when the National Health Insurance
Act came into force.

Previous to 1874, the interests of the workers in the carpet trade in
Scotland were vested in a more or less irregular form of a Trade Union,
whose activities were mainly directed by the workers in Glasgow; but
with the development of the Trade Union movement in the seventies,
several efforts were made by a few enthusiasts to form a regular
society. After many futile attempts in this direction, a conference was
ultimately held in the St. Mungo Hotel, Glasgow, on 7th March, 1874,
when the following attended as representatives of their respective
districts—

BONNYRIGG.—Mr. John Craig.

GLASGOW.—Messrs. John Mitchell, Robert Logan, Thomas Ramsay.

GLENPATRICK (Elderslie).—Messrs. John Miller, James McLellan.

PAISLEY.—Messrs. James McNaughton, William Findlay.

ROSLIN (Mid-Lothian).—Mr. James Armour.

KILMARNOCK.—Mr. James Young.

Mr. William Findlay, of Paisley, was called to preside over the
conference; and Mr. Thomas Ramsay, of Glasgow, was appointed Secretary.
After the various representatives had expressed their opinions for and
against the formation of a Union on progressive lines, it was ultimately
agreed that a Protective and Provident Union be formed, and that members
be given the option of joining either for Trade Protection and Sick and
Funeral Benefit, or for Trade Protection only, by paying the weekly
contribution of 4d. or 2d. per week respectively. It was further decided
at this conference that the first Executive Committee be composed of six
members from Glasgow, and one each from Paisley and Glenpatrick. Thus we
have the origin of the present “Scotch Power Looms Carpet Trade
Protective and Provident Association.”

According to the constitution of the Association as it then existed, the
Executive Committee had the power to appoint its own officials; and on
9th March, 1874, Mr. Robert Logan and Mr. Thomas Ramsay, both of the
Glasgow Branch, were elected President and Secretary respectively.

At a meeting held on 19th April, 1874, the Secretary intimated that the
organisation was proceeding very satisfactorily. Up to this date, 102
members had joined for the full benefits and 83 for trade benefits;
Bonnyrigg being the only branch which had not responded to the call for
organisation.

In February, 1875, a joint conference with the English workers was held
in Halifax, for the dual purpose of soliciting assistance for the
Glenpatrick workers, who were then on strike, and with a view to a
thorough organisation of the whole of the workers in the trade. Some
good financial assistance was obtained, but the organisation was not as
successful as might have been expected, although Kidderminster placed
their experience at the disposal of all the workers, The next few years
were taken up in purely local affairs; and in February, 1881, the
question of an uniform price list for Tapestry weaving and tying-in was
discussed; and a draft scheme was submitted to a meeting of delegates.
However, as complete agreement among the workers could not be obtained,
the efforts in this direction did not materialise.

From 1894 onwards, the Association realised the necessity of a more
powerful organisation and sufficient funds to support the members; and
strong recommendations were repeatedly put forward by the Executive for
increased contributions; but owing to apparent apathy on the part of
members, these recommendations were not taken up with the zeal necessary
for their success.

At the Annual Delegates’ Meeting held in May, 1895, the question of
replenishing the funds of the Association, which had been greatly
depleted, was discussed; and it was ultimately decided to raise the
contributions from 4d. to 6d. per week. As a result of this increase,
two of the branches in the East of Scotland seceded.

In July, 1895, the question of amalgamating with the Kidderminster
Association was again discussed; but again no definite steps were taken.

In 1897 an effort was made by the East shops (Bonnyrigg, Eskbank, and
Roslin) to form a local union. This was partially established, but in
June, 1904, a lock-out took place in the district on the question of
shift working; and the local union, not being able to deal with the
matter, appealed to the Executive of this Association for assistance,
which was granted. The Executive opened negotiations with the firms
concerned, and after a few weeks duration, a satisfactory agreement was
arrived at, with the result that the local union was dissolved, and the
members agreed to join the original Association. In March, 1895, the
membership of the Association was returned at 397.

A special conference was held in Glasgow on 30th September, 1905, with
the object of endeavouring to get the employers to return to the rates
for tying beams which were reduced in 1886. A scheme was ultimately
drawn up and submitted to the employers in 1906; but negotiations proved
unproductive.

In 1905, the Glenpatrick branch, which had seceded in 1875 after their
unsuccessful strike, rejoined the Association, some 72 weavers becoming
members. In March, 1906, the membership of the Association was returned
at 462.

In May, 1906, a dispute arose in the Charleston (Paisley) branch on the
question of the weaving rate for a new fabric, which lasted about four
months.

In 1907 the Association became affiliated to the General Federation of
Trade Unions with a view to strengthening the reserve funds of the
Association.

In 1907 and 1908, a further effort was made to bring about an
affiliation of the English and Scotch Carpet Trade Unions; and on this
occasion a constitution was drawn up, but at the last moment, when all
seemed shaping well for the formation of a Federation, the matter again
dropped.

In 1911, after prolonged negotiations with the Tapestry manufacturers, a
new scheme for payment for weaving was drawn up on a proportionate
basis, which was considered, at least so far as Scotland was concerned,
to be a great step towards uniformity of rates. The workers’ interests
in the drawing up of this scheme were very capably handled by Messrs.
Rough, Robertson, and Howie. After the establishment of this scheme,
things went on smoothly until August, 1914, when the outbreak of war put
the organisation, in common with many others, into a condition of
suspense. The General Secretary was called to the Colours; and a large
proportion of the younger members answered the call to arms. Thanks,
however, to careful and judicious handling, the Association ultimately
overcame all difficulties; and not only was the Association preserved,
but that which was almost despaired of, and which was the dream of the
pioneers of the movement, was also achieved: namely, the complete
organisation of all carpet workers in the Brussels, Wilton, and Tapestry
carpet trade of Scotland. By the end of 1918, the membership of the
Association, in spite of the great depletion in the ranks of the workers
caused by the war, had increased to 1,200.

Since 1914 the Executive was successful in obtaining the adoption of a
new scheme for payment for tying-in beams, replacing the one which was
abolished in 1886, and giving satisfaction to all workers in the
Tapestry trade.

The progress and development of the Scotch Association during the past
few years, and the successful amalgamation with the English
Associations, has been largely due to the tact and energy of the
President, Mr. Thomas Lindsay, of Paisley.

The Kidderminster, Northern Counties, and Scottish Associations were
amalgamated in November, 1917, under the title of “The National
Affiliation of Carpet Trade Unions.” The objects of the affiliation were
the maintenance of uniform rates, the regulation of the supply of hands
and hours of work, and generally the regulation of the relations of
employers and employed in the trade.

The constitution is simple, the control of the Affiliation being vested
in the hands of an Affiliation Board, composed of three representatives
from each Association. The Board appoints a President, Secretary, and
Treasurer, each Association being entitled to one official.

During the spring and early summer of 1919 negotiations had been
proceeding between the Employers, the Trade Unions’ representatives, and
the Ministry of Labour for the formation of a Joint Industrial Council
for the Carpet Trade; and the inaugural meeting of this body was held
under the auspices of Mr. John Hodge, M.P., on 18th July. It was
composed as follows—


                            EMPLOYERS’ SIDE

              Kidderminster and District
                Manufacturers’ Association              5
              Northern Counties’ Manufacturers’
                Association                             5
              Scottish Manufacturers’ Association       4
                                                        —
                                                       14


                            EMPLOYEES’ SIDE

              National Affiliation of Carpet Trade
                Unions                                 10
              General Union of Textile Workers          2
              The Amalgamated Society of Gas,
                Municipal, and General Workers          1
              Workers’ Union                            1
                                                        —
                                                       14

Mr. Herbert Smith, of Kidderminster (Employers), was elected Chairman,
and Mr. Thomas Lindsay, of Paisley (Employees), Vice-Chairman.




                              CHAPTER XIV
                               CONCLUSION


IT may be of interest to consider briefly the prospects of the industry.

The Carpet Trade is in several respects a peculiar one. Its principal
raw materials, wool, cotton, and jute, are of such outstanding
importance to more essential industries, that their supply and their
price are conditioned by the latter; so that the Carpet Trade has to
accommodate itself to a market which is not controlled to any extent by
its own needs. It is not a large industry; but it employs a number of
operatives in whom a high degree of technical skill is required in a
great variety of branches; and it utilises a considerable quantity of
ingenious machinery of many kinds. It is, strictly speaking, a luxury
trade. That is to say, it is obvious that it is theoretically more
possible to exist in a house with no carpets, than in a house, say, with
no tables and chairs, while a floor covering is perhaps less of a
necessity than wall-paper or curtains. Of course, as a matter of fact,
the line is not drawn sharply between carpets and other articles of
furnishing. A person who is furnishing a house, if he can afford
curtains can probably afford carpets, though he may, indeed, find his
mind divided between his desire to provide his home with a comfort that
is almost a necessity, and his hesitation to indulge himself in a
comfort that may be regarded as a luxury. Where the practical test of
the trade being a luxury trade comes, is in the matter of renewals. It
is here that the Carpet Industry is sensitive to the periodical changes
in commercial prosperity, which seem to be inherent in modern
civilisation. Generally speaking, when trade is bad the Carpet Industry
is the first to suffer; and when there is a recovery it is some time
before it feels the benefit. It seems that, with the first pinch of
adversity, the carpet consumer decides upon a policy of economy that
excludes the purchase of carpets, whatever else may or may not be
bought.

Hence arises a period of depression in the carpet trade, with a decrease
of profitable production, and consequent unemployment; and this in the
future, in the face of higher wages and more keenly realised
responsibilities towards employees, will certainly be an even more
serious matter than it has been in the past.

The matter of the import of foreign goods has been mentioned in the
chapter on Hand-made Carpets; and all that was said therein as regards
the unrestricted entrance into the British market of Eastern and
Continental productions applies to some extent to their competition with
all makes and grades of carpet. The home market for carpets is a large
one normally, but it is not capable of indefinite expansion; the
consumption has its limits; and if the market is invaded by foreign
goods, the consumption and the price of the domestic product will
quickly fall with unpleasant if not disastrous results upon the
industry.

The dangers indicated axe real ones, serious alike for Capital and
Labour, who, more than ever in the past, will have to stand or fall
together; and they deserve consideration, as regards the way in which
they may best be met.

As previously indicated, various Associations exist in the Carpet Trade;
but it may be admitted that there is scope for better organisation as
regards consideration of matters that affect the Industry as a whole. If
it is to be on a firm foundation, there should be a more complete
recognition of the fact that the interests of all units of the trade are
identical. Further, in any new scheme of combination the position of
Labour will have to be recognised, and its co-operation cordially
welcomed. Some such scheme as is outlined in the well-known Whitley
Report, though it is by no means free from difficulties, may
materialise, possibly in a modified form. The principle at any rate is a
good one; and carpet manufacturers have had no cause to complain of
their relations with their employees (nor _vice versâ_) in the past, nor
any cause for doubting a reasonable attitude on the part of Trade Unions
in the future. No reasonable employers in the Carpet Trade will begrudge
their employees a fair remuneration for their work, nor improved
conditions of working. Nor, on the other hand, will they be sorry to
admit Trade Union representatives to a share in dealing with general
trade problems. It seems manifestly right, for instance, that men no
less than masters should consider how the Industry is affected by tariff
questions, or how high wages or reduced working hours may be made
compatible with the maintenance of the export trade.

Apart from this, it remains to be seen whether the manufacturers
themselves can devise any satisfactory scheme for protecting their own
interests and those of the Industry generally. All are pretty well
agreed as to the desirability of closer and more efficient combination:
differences of opinion exist as to the best methods by which this may be
achieved.




                                 INDEX


Art squares, 88

Aubusson, 4, 22
Axminster, 5
—— carpeting, 49
—— qualities, 50-52
——, seamless, 61
——, setting, 54
—— weaving process, 54, 55
—— weft motion, 58

Beauvais, 4, 22
Brussels carpeting, 29
——, chain warp, 31
——, finishing, 38
——, pressing, 38
—— qualities, 35, 36
——, sprouting, 37
——, stuffer warp, 31
——, weaving process, 32
——, winding, 30
——, worsted, 29

Cairo squares, 38
Carlisle, 23
Carpets, antiquity of, 1
——, artificial ageing of, 26
——, doctoring of, 25
——, earliest makers of, 24
——, European and Asiatic, 26
——, export of, 105, 106
——, import of, 106
——, introduction into England, 3
——, sewing of, 42
Carpet trade associations, 107
—— ——, commercial conditions of, 119
—— ——, District Association, 110
—— ——, distribution of, 104
Carpet Trade Industrial Council, 118
—— —— Rationing Committee, 109
Chenille, 63
——, fur cutting, 65
——, qualities, 67
——, setting, 66
——, weft weaving, 64
Chlidema squares, 38
Colour, 92
Competition, foreign, 27, 120
Cotton, 11
Creel bobbin, 30

Design, 92
Distribution of carpet industry, 104
Donegal, 23
Drying yarns, 19
Dyeing, 13
—— yarns, 14
—— machines, 15, 16
—— process, 18
Dyes of Oriental carpets, 25
Dyestuffs, 18, 25
Dye vats, 14

Eclecticism in design, 102
Egyptian loom, 1
Employees, number of, 104
Employers and employed, 107
Export carpet trade, 105, 106

Fine Wiltons, 45
Flax warp, 23
—— yarn, 11
Foreign competition, 27, 120

Hakluyt, 3
Halifax, 7
Hand-made carpets, 20
Henry IV, 4
—— VIII, 4

Imperial Axminster, 50
Ingrain carpeting, 86
—— qualities, 87

Jacquard, 31
—— Axminster, 59
Jute yarn, 10

Kidderminster, 5, 104
—— carpeting, 86
—— Carpet Weavers’ Association, 100
Kilmarnock, 6
Knots, Turkish and Persian, 21

Linen yarn, 11
Louis XIV, 4

Maffersdorf, 23
Materials, 9
——, consumption of, 104
Medallion squares, 42
Mohair, 10
Morris, influence of, 99

National Affiliation, 117
Northern Counties Association, 112

Ornament, classes of, 97
Owen Jones, 97, 99

Paper yarn, 11
Plain Wilton, 47
Planting, 34

Qualities, standardisation of, 108

Ramie yarn, 11
Reproduction, 100

Saxony Wilton, 46
Scotch carpeting, 86
Scouring of yarns, 13
Seamless Axminster, 61
Self colours, 95
Silk, 9
Starching, 34
Statistics, 104

Tapestry, 7, 71
——, printing, 74
——, scaleboard, 78
——, setting, 81
——, steaming, 81
——, stripping, 80
——, velvet, 84
——, weaving, 83
Trade unions, 110
Two-colour effect, 96

Washing of carpets, 26
Whytock, 6, 71
Wilton, 4, 5, 23
Wilton carpeting, 44
——, plains, 47
——, qualities, 45
——, shading of, 47
Wool, character and consumption of, 9, 10
——, characteristics of, 17
Woollen Wiltons, 46

Yarn drying, 19
—— scouring, 13

                 *        *        *        *        *

       _Printed by Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons, Ltd., Bath, England_




                           BRINTONS LIMITED
                            KIDDERMINSTER

     _Tel. Address: Brintons, Kidderminster.      Telephone No. 5_

                      WORSTED AND WOOLLEN SPINNERS
                      CARPET AND RUG MANUFACTURERS

                             [Illustration]

                   _Brussels_, _Wilton_, _Axminster_,
                     _Chenille_, and _Hand Tufted_
                      . . . . _Carpeting_ . . . .

                             [Illustration]

                   _Cotton_, _Jute_, _Hemp_, _Linen_
                     . . _and Worsted Webbing_ . .

                             [Illustration]

                          WAREHOUSES—
       London     10 Ivy Lane, Newgate St., E.C.    Tel. 7529 Cent.
       Manchester 53 Portland Street                Tel. 4739 City
       Glasgow    50 Wellington Street              Tel. 7314 City

  _Tel. Addresses_: Brintons, London; Brintons, Manchester; Brintons,
                                Glasgow




                      Robert Hall & Sons Bury Ltd.
                            Bury, Lancashire

                        Makers of all classes of
                 Looms, Preparing & Finishing Machinery

    ¶ Complete Plants of Machinery for Brussels and Wilton Carpets,
    Squares, etc., Tapestry and Velvet Carpets, Carriage Linings,
    Rugs, Slipper Tops, Cocoa Matting and Mats, Royal Axminster and
    Chenille Axminster Carpets, Turkey Carpets, Scotch and
    Kidderminster Carpets, etc.,

                        in all widths, including

    Winding, Warping, Beaming, Sizing Printing, Setting, Starching,
    Drying and Steaming, Rolling and Shearing or Cropping Machines

                 *        *        *        *        *

                    _Special Hand Looms for Carpets_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                 Makers of the Noted Moxon Carpet Loom

                 *        *        *        *        *

  Also Preparing, Weaving and Finishing Machinery for Cotton, Woollen,
                     Linen, Jute, Ramie, Silk, etc.




               _Common Commodities and Industries Series_
Each book in crown 8vo, cloth, with many illustrations, charts, etc. 2s.
                               6d. net.

Tea: From Grower to Consumer. By A. Ibbetson.

Coffee: From Grower to Consumer. By B. B. Keable.

Sugar: Cane and Beet. By Geo. Martineau, C.B.

Cotton: From the Raw Material to the Finished Product. By R. J. Peake.

Rubber: Production and Utilisation of the Raw Product. By C. Beadle and
  H. P. Stevens, M.A., Ph.D., F.I.C.

Iron and Steel: Their Production and Manufacture. By C. Hood.

Silk: Its Production and Manufacture. By Luther Hooper.

Tobacco: From Grower to Smoker. By A. E. Tanner.

Wool: From the Raw Material to the Finished Product. By J. A. Hunter.

Coal: Its Origin, Method of Working, and Preparation for the Market. By
  Francis H. Wilson, M.Inst. M.E.

Linen: From the Field to the Finished Product. By Alfred S. Moore.

Timber: From the Forest to its Use in Commerce. By William Bullock.

Clays and Clay Products. By A. B. Searle.

Leather: From the Raw Material to the Finished Product. By K. J. Adcock.

Oils: Animal, Vegetable, Essential, and Mineral. By C. Ainsworth
  Mitchell, B.A., F.I.C.

Wheat and its Products. By A. Millar.

Copper: From the Ore to the Metal. By H. K. Picard, Assoc. Royal School
  of Mines, Mem. Inst, of Min. and Met.

Paper: Its History, Sources, and Production. By H. A. Maddox.

Glass and Glass Manufacture. By Percival Marson.

Soap: Its Composition, Manufacture, and Properties. By William H.
  Simmons.

The Motor Industry. By Horace Wyatt, B.A.

The Boot and Shoe Industry. By J. S. Harding.

Gums and Resins. By Ernest J. Parry.

Furniture. By H. E. Binstead.


                    _Other Volumes in preparation._

                 *        *        *        *        *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Some illustrations have been moved slightly to keep paragraphs intact.
Archaic spellings and hyphenation have been retained. A few obvious
typesetting errors have been corrected without note. The advertisements
and publisher's catalogue have been moved from the front of the book to
the end of the book.

[End of _Carpets_, by R. S. Brinton]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Carpets, by Reginald Seymore Brinton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARPETS ***

***** This file should be named 58469-0.txt or 58469-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/4/6/58469/

Produced by Mardi Desjardins & the online Distributed
Proofreaders Canada team at https://www.pgdpcanada.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

